Hypertension
Hypertension(high blood pressure) is when the pressure in your blood vessels is too high (140/90 mmHg or higher). It is common but can be serious if not treated.
People with high blood pressure may not feel symptoms. The only way to know is to get your blood pressure checked.
Things that increase the risk of having high blood pressure include:
older age 
genetics
being overweight or obese
not being physically active 
high-salt diet
drinking too much alcohol
Lifestyle changes like eating a healthier diet, quitting tobacco and being more active can help lower blood pressure. Some people may still need to take medicines.
Blood pressure is written as two numbers. The first (systolic) number represents the pressure in blood vessels when the heart contracts or beats. The second (diastolic) number represents the pressure in the vessels when the heart rests between beats.
Hypertension is diagnosed if, when it is measured on two different days, the systolic blood pressure readings on both days is ≥140 mmHg and/or the diastolic blood pressure readings on both days is ≥90 mmHg.
Risk factors
Modifiable risk factors include unhealthy diets (excessive salt consumption, a diet high in saturated fat and trans fats, low intake of fruits and vegetables), physical inactivity, consumption of tobacco and alcohol, and being overweight or obese. In addition, there are environmental risk factors for hypertension and associated diseases, where air pollution is the most significant. 
Non-modifiable risk factors include a family history of hypertension, age over 65 years and co-existing diseases such as diabetes or kidney disease.
Symptoms
Most people with hypertension don’t feel any symptoms. Very high blood pressures can cause headaches, blurred vision, chest pain and other symptoms. 
Checking your blood pressure is the best way to know if you have high blood pressure. If hypertension isn’t treated, it can cause other health conditions like kidney disease, heart disease and stroke.
People with very high blood pressure (usually 180/120 or higher) can experience symptoms including:
severe headaches
chest pain
dizziness
difficulty breathing
nausea
vomiting
blurred vision or other vision changes
anxiety
confusion
buzzing in the ears
nosebleeds
abnormal heart rhythm
If you are experiencing any of these symptoms and a high blood pressure, seek care immediately.
The only way to detect hypertension is to have a health professional measure blood pressure. Having blood pressure measured is quick and painless. Although individuals can measure their own blood pressure using automated devices, an evaluation by a health professional is important for assessment of risk and associated conditions.
Treatment
Lifestyle changes can help lower high blood pressure. These include:
eating a healthy, low-salt diet
losing weight
being physically active
quitting tobacco.
If you have high blood pressure, your doctor may recommend one or more medicines. Your recommended blood pressure goal may depend on what other health conditions you have. 
Blood pressure goal is less than 130/80 if you have:
cardiovascular disease (heart disease or stroke)
diabetes (high blood sugar)
chronic kidney disease
high risk for cardiovascular disease.
For most people, the goal is to have a blood pressure less than 140/90. 
There are several common blood pressure medicines: 
ACE inhibitors including enalapril and lisinopril relax blood vessels and prevent kidney damage.
Angiotensin-2 receptor blockers (ARBs) including losartan and telmisartan relax blood vessels and prevent kidney damage.
Calcium channel blockers including amlodipine and felodipine relax blood vessels.
Diuretics including hydrochlorothiazide and chlorthalidone eliminate extra water from the body, lowering blood pressure.
Prevention
Lifestyle changes can help lower high blood pressure and can help anyone with hypertension. Many who make these changes will still need to take medicine. 
These lifestyle changes can help prevent and lower high blood pressure. 
Do:
Eat more vegetables and fruits.
Sit less.
Be more physically active, which can include walking, running, swimming, dancing or activities that build strength, like lifting weights.
Get at least 150 minutes per week of moderate-intensity aerobic activity or 75 minutes per week of vigorous aerobic activity.
Do strength building exercises 2 or more days each week.
Lose weight if you’re overweight or obese.
Take medicines as prescribed by your health care professional.
Keep appointments with your health care professional.
Don’t:
eat too much salty food (try to stay under 2 grams per day)
eat foods high in saturated or trans fats
smoke or use tobacco
drink too much alcohol (1 drink daily max for women, 2 for men)
miss or share medication.
Reducing hypertension prevents heart attack, stroke and kidney damage, as well as other health problems.
Reduce the risks of hypertension by:
reducing and managing stress
regularly checking blood pressure
treating high blood pressure
managing other medical conditions
reducing exposure to polluted air.
Complications of uncontrolled hypertension
Among other complications, hypertension can cause serious damage to the heart. Excessive pressure can harden arteries, decreasing the flow of blood and oxygen to the heart. This elevated pressure and reduced blood flow can cause:
chest pain, also called angina;
heart attack, which occurs when the blood supply to the heart is blocked and heart muscle cells die from lack of oxygen. The longer the blood flow is blocked, the greater the damage to the heart;
heart failure, which occurs when the heart cannot pump enough blood and oxygen to other vital body organs; and
irregular heart beat which can lead to a sudden death.
Hypertension can also burst or block arteries that supply blood and oxygen to the brain, causing a stroke.
In addition, hypertension can cause kidney damage, leading to kidney failure.
Prevalence of hypertension
The prevalence of hypertension varies across regions and country income groups. The WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region has the highest prevalence of hypertension (38%) while the WHO Western Pacific Region has the lowest prevalence of hypertension (29%).
The number of adults with hypertension increased from 650 million in 1990 to 1.4 billion in 2024, with the increase seen largely in low- and middle-income countries. This increase is due mainly to a rise in the number of older adults in those countries. 

Coronary artery disease:
Coronary artery disease (CAD) happens when the arteries supplying blood to the heart become narrow or blocked due to plaque (cholesterol) buildup.
This reduces oxygen-rich blood to the heart and can lead to chest pain (angina) or a heart attack.
CAD often develops slowly over many years and may show no symptoms until a heart attack occurs, making it a “silent killer.”
There are two main types:
Stable CAD: Gradual narrowing, manageable symptoms.
Acute coronary syndrome: Sudden blockage causing a heart attack.
Common symptoms: Chest pain, shortness of breath, fatigue (or no symptoms).
Major risk factors: Smoking, high cholesterol, high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity, lack of exercise, poor diet, and family history.
Main complication: Heart attack; others include heart failure and abnormal heart rhythms.
Treatment includes:
Lifestyle changes (healthy diet, exercise, quitting smoking)
Medications (to control cholesterol, blood pressure, clots)
Procedures like angioplasty (stent) or bypass surgery
CAD cannot be reversed, but it can be controlled to live a longer, healthier life.

Heart failure
What is congestive heart failure?
Congestive heart failure, or heart failure, is a long-term condition in which your heart can’t pump blood well enough to meet your body’s needs. Your heart is still working. But because it can’t handle the amount of blood it should, blood builds up in other parts of your body. Most of the time, it collects in your lungs, legs and feet.

Think of it like a shipping department that can’t keep up with getting all the shipments where they need to go. The shipping department is always running behind and things pile up. When things pile up, they cause issues.

Types of congestive heart failure
Types of congestive heart failure include:

Left-sided heart failure.
Right-sided heart failure.
High-output heart failure. This is a rare type of congestive heart failure.
How common is congestive heart failure?
More than 6 million people in the United States have congestive heart failure. It’s the leading cause of hospitalization in people older than 65.

Symptoms and Causes
What are the congestive heart failure symptoms?
Congestive heart failure symptoms include:

Shortness of breath.
Waking up short of breath at night.
Chest pain.
Heart palpitations.
Fatigue when you’re active.
Swelling in your ankles, legs and abdomen.
Weight gain.
Need to urinate while resting at night.
A dry, hacking cough.
A full (bloated) or hard stomach.
Loss of appetite or upset stomach (nausea).
Sometimes, you may have mild symptoms of congestive heart failure or none at all. This doesn’t mean you don’t have heart failure anymore. Symptoms of heart failure can range from mild to severe and may come and go.

Unfortunately, congestive heart failure usually gets worse over time. As it worsens, you may have more or different signs or symptoms.

What causes congestive heart failure?
Causes of congestive heart failure include:

Coronary artery disease and/or heart attack.
Cardiomyopathy (genetic or viral).
Heart issues present at birth (congenital heart disease).
Diabetes.
High blood pressure (hypertension).
Arrhythmia.
Kidney disease.
A body mass index (BMI) higher than 30.
Tobacco and recreational drug use.
Alcohol use.
Medications such as cancer drugs (chemotherapy).
Left-sided heart failure is the most common cause of right-sided heart failure. When your left ventricle isn’t working correctly, it allows blood to back up. At some point, this backup affects your right ventricle. Other causes include certain lung problems and issues in other organs.

What are the risk factors for congestive heart failure?
Risk factors for congestive heart failure include:

Being older than 65.
Using tobacco products, cocaine or alcohol.
Having an inactive (sedentary) lifestyle.
Eating foods that have a lot of salt and fat.
Having high blood pressure.
Having coronary artery disease.
Having a heart attack.
Having a family history of congestive heart failure.
What are the complications of congestive heart failure?
Some of the complications from congestive heart failure include:

Irregular heartbeat.
Sudden cardiac arrest.
Heart valve problems.
A collection of fluid in your lungs.
Pulmonary hypertension.
Kidney damage.
Liver damage.
Malnutrition.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is congestive heart failure diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will ask you about your symptoms and medical history. They may ask you about:

Other health conditions you have.
A family history of heart disease or sudden death.
Your use of tobacco products.
How much alcohol you drink.
Any history of chemotherapy and/or radiation.
The medications you take.
You’ll also have a physical exam. Your provider will look for signs of congestive heart failure and diseases that may have made your heart muscle weak or stiff.

What are the four stages of congestive heart failure?
Heart failure is a chronic condition that gets worse with time. There are four heart failure stages (Stages A, B, C and D). They range from having a high risk of developing heart failure to having advanced heart failure.

Stage A
Stage A (pre-heart failure) means you’re at a high risk of developing heart failure because you have a family history of congestive heart failure or you have one or more of these medical conditions:

Hypertension.
Diabetes.
Coronary artery disease.
Metabolic syndrome.
History of alcohol use disorder.
History of rheumatic fever.
Family history of cardiomyopathy.
History of taking drugs that can damage your heart muscle, such as some cancer drugs.
Stage B
Stage B (pre-heart failure) means your left ventricle isn’t working well and/or is structurally abnormal but you’ve never had symptoms of heart failure.

Stage C
People with Stage C heart failure have a congestive heart failure diagnosis and currently have or previously had signs and symptoms of the condition.

Stage D and reduced EF (ejection fraction)
People who have Stage D HFrEF (heart failure with reduced ejection fraction) have advanced symptoms that don’t get better with treatment. This is the final stage of heart failure.

What tests will be done to diagnose congestive heart failure?
Common tests to identify congestive heart failure, its stage and its cause include:

Blood tests.
Cardiac catheterization.
Chest X-ray.
Echocardiogram.
Heart MRI (magnetic resonance imaging).
Cardiac computed tomography (CT).
Electrocardiogram (EKG or ECG).
Multigated Acquisition Scan (MUGA scan).
Stress test.
Genetic testing.
Management and Treatment
How is congestive heart failure treated?
Your treatment will depend on the type of heart failure you have and, in part, what caused it. Medications and lifestyle changes are part of every heart failure treatment plan. Your healthcare provider will talk to you about the best treatment plan for you.

There’s no cure for heart failure. As congestive heart failure gets worse, your heart muscle pumps less blood to your organs, and you move toward the next stage of heart failure. Since you can’t move backward through the heart failure stages, the goal of treatment is to keep you from moving forward through the stages or to slow down the progression of your heart failure.

Stage A treatment
Treatment for people with Stage A heart failure includes:

Regular exercise, such as walking every day.
No tobacco products.
Treatment for high blood pressure (medication, low-sodium diet, active lifestyle).
Treatment for high cholesterol.
No alcohol or recreational drugs.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I) or an angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) if you have coronary artery disease, diabetes, high blood pressure or other vascular or cardiac conditions.
Stage B treatment
Treatment for people with Stage B heart failure includes:

Treatments for Stage A.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I) or angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) if your EF is 40% or lower.
Beta-blocker if you’ve had a heart attack and your EF is 40% or lower (if you aren’t already taking one).
Aldosterone antagonist if you’ve had a heart attack or if you have an EF of 35% or less.
Possible surgery or intervention as a treatment for coronary artery blockage, heart attack, valve disease (valve repair or replacement) or congenital heart disease.
Stage C treatment
Treatment for people with Stage C HFrEF includes:

Treatments from Stages A and B.
Beta-blocker.
Aldosterone antagonist.
Sodium-glucose transport 2 inhibitors (SGLT2i).
Hydralazine/nitrate combination if other treatments don’t stop your symptoms and you’re African American.
Medications that slow your heart rate if your heart rate is faster than 70 beats per minute and you still have symptoms.
A diuretic (“water pill”) if symptoms continue.
Restriction of sodium (salt) in your diet.
Weight tracking every day. Tell your healthcare provider if you gain or lose more than 4 pounds.
Possible fluid restriction.
Possible cardiac resynchronization therapy (biventricular pacemaker).
Possible implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) therapy.
If the treatment improves or stops your symptoms, you still need to continue treatment to slow the progression to Stage D.

Stage D treatment
Treatment for people who have Stage D heart failure includes treatments for Stages A, B and C. In addition, it includes evaluation for more advanced treatment options, including:

Heart transplant.
Ventricular assist devices.
Heart surgery.
Continuous infusion of inotropic drugs.
Palliative or hospice care.
Stages C and D with preserved EF
Treatment for people with Stage C and Stage D heart failure and preserved EF (HFpEF) includes:

Treatments for Stages A and B.
Medications for the treatment of medical conditions that can cause heart failure or make it worse, such as atrial fibrillation, high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity, coronary artery disease, chronic lung disease, high cholesterol and kidney disease.
Diuretic (“water pill”) to reduce or relieve symptoms.
It’s very important for you to manage your other health conditions, such as:

Diabetes.
Kidney disease.
Anemia.
High blood pressure.
Thyroid disease.
Asthma.
Chronic lung disease.
Some conditions have signs and symptoms similar to congestive heart failure. If you have new or worsening nonurgent symptoms, tell your healthcare provider.

Complications/side effects of the treatment
Complications of congestive heart failure treatments may include:

Hypotension.
Kidney failure.
Infections from frequent hospital visits that involve central IVs.
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have congestive heart failure?
With the right care, congestive heart failure won’t stop you from doing the things you enjoy. Your prognosis, or outlook for the future, will depend on:

How well your heart muscle is working.
Your symptoms.
How well you respond to your treatment plan.
How well you follow your treatment plan.
One study says that people with congestive heart failure have a life span 10 years shorter than those who don’t have heart failure. Another study showed that the survival rates of people with chronic heart failure were:

80% to 90% for one year.
50% to 60% for year five.
30% for 10 years.
A different study found that people who had heart failure had expected life spans ranging from three to 20 years after their hospital stay, depending on various factors like age and sex. It’s important to look at your specific situation when considering your prognosis.

How long congestive heart failure lasts
Congestive heart failure is a chronic, or lifelong, condition. You’ll need to treat it for the rest of your life.

Prevention
How can I lower my risk of congestive heart failure?
Although you can’t change some risk factors like age, family history or race, you can change your lifestyle to give yourself the best chance of preventing heart failure. Things you can do include:

Staying at a weight that’s healthy for you.
Eating foods that are good for your heart.
Exercising regularly.
Managing your stress.
Stopping the use of tobacco products.
Not drinking alcohol.
Not using recreational drugs.
Taking care of other medical conditions you have that can increase your risk.

Myocardial infarction
Myocardial infarction (MI), commonly known as a heart attack, is a life-threatening medical condition that occurs when blood flow to a part of the heart muscle is blocked. This lack of blood flow leads to the damage or death of heart tissue, which can have severe consequences for the individual. A heart attack can lead to permanent damage to the heart and other complications, making it one of the leading causes of death worldwide.

Understanding the causes, symptoms, and risk factors of myocardial infarction is crucial for early detection and prevention. In this article, we will explore the definition of myocardial infarction, its causes, risk factors, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment options, and long-term outlook, providing valuable information for both patients and caregivers.

Definition: What is Myocardial Infarction?
Myocardial infarction (MI) is a medical term for a heart attack, which occurs when the blood flow to a part of the heart muscle is blocked or restricted. This blockage prevents oxygen and nutrients from reaching the heart muscle, causing tissue damage or death. The primary cause of MI is the buildup of fatty deposits, known as plaque, in the coronary arteries, a condition called atherosclerosis.

A myocardial infarction is classified based on the severity of the damage caused to the heart and the type of blockage:

ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI): A more severe type of heart attack caused by a complete blockage of a coronary artery. It is usually diagnosed by changes in the ECG (electrocardiogram) of the heart.
Non-ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (NSTEMI): A less severe type of heart attack, where the blockage is partial or temporary, and there may be less damage to the heart muscle.
Both types of myocardial infarction require prompt medical treatment to restore blood flow and prevent further damage to the heart.

Causes and Risk Factors
Infectious/Environmental Causes:
Infections:
While infections are not a direct cause of myocardial infarction, certain viral or bacterial infections can lead to inflammation in the coronary arteries, increasing the risk of plaque rupture. Inflammatory conditions like myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) can also contribute to heart attack risk, although they are less common.
Air Pollution:
Studies suggest that long-term exposure to air pollution can increase the risk of heart attacks. Pollutants like fine particulate matter can cause inflammation in the blood vessels, contributing to the buildup of plaque and narrowing of the coronary arteries, ultimately leading to MI.
Genetic/Autoimmune Causes:
Genetic Factors:
A family history of heart disease increases the risk of myocardial infarction. Inherited conditions such as familial hypercholesterolemia, which causes high cholesterol levels from birth, can also significantly increase the likelihood of developing atherosclerosis and subsequent heart attacks.
Autoimmune Diseases:
Autoimmune conditions, such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, can increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. These conditions cause chronic inflammation that can contribute to the buildup of plaque in the arteries and increase the likelihood of a heart attack.
Lifestyle and Dietary Factors:
Poor Diet:
Diets high in saturated fats, trans fats, and cholesterol contribute to the buildup of plaque in the arteries, leading to atherosclerosis and an increased risk of MI. High intake of processed foods, sugar, and red meat can also negatively affect heart health.
Obesity and Physical Inactivity:
Obesity, especially abdominal obesity, is a major risk factor for heart disease. Lack of physical activity leads to weight gain, high blood pressure, and increased cholesterol levels, all of which are linked to a higher risk of heart attacks.
Excessive Alcohol Consumption:
Heavy drinking can raise blood pressure and cholesterol levels, contributing to the risk of developing coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction.
Key Risk Factors:
Age:
The risk of a heart attack increases with age, especially for individuals over the age of 45 for men and 55 for women. As people age, the blood vessels tend to become less flexible, and the buildup of plaque in the arteries increases.
Gender:
Men are at a higher risk of experiencing a heart attack at an earlier age compared to women. However, the risk for women increases significantly after menopause, due to the decrease in protective estrogen levels.
High Blood Pressure:
Hypertension (high blood pressure) is one of the most important risk factors for myocardial infarction. High blood pressure damages the arteries, making them more susceptible to plaque buildup and leading to coronary artery disease.
High Cholesterol:
Elevated levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, or "bad" cholesterol, contribute to the formation of plaques in the arteries. On the other hand, high levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, or "good" cholesterol, can help remove plaque and reduce the risk of heart disease.
Diabetes:
People with diabetes are at an increased risk of myocardial infarction due to higher blood sugar levels, which can damage blood vessels over time. Diabetes is also associated with higher levels of cholesterol and blood pressure, which further increase the risk.
Smoking:
Smoking is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease. It damages the blood vessels, raises blood pressure, and increases the formation of blood clots, all of which contribute to the risk of heart attack.
Stress:
Chronic stress, anxiety, and depression can increase the risk of heart attack by raising blood pressure, heart rate, and causing inflammation in the arteries.
Symptoms of Myocardial Infarction
The symptoms of myocardial infarction can vary from person to person. While some individuals experience classic symptoms, others may have atypical signs. Recognizing the symptoms early can save lives, as prompt treatment is crucial to prevent further damage to the heart.

Common Symptoms:
Chest Pain or Discomfort:
The most common symptom of a heart attack is chest pain or discomfort. This may feel like pressure, tightness, or a heavy weight on the chest. The pain may radiate to the arms, back, neck, jaw, or stomach.
Shortness of Breath:
Difficulty breathing, especially during physical exertion or while lying down, can be a sign of myocardial infarction. This occurs due to the heart's inability to pump blood effectively, causing fluid buildup in the lungs.
Fatigue or Weakness:
Individuals experiencing a heart attack may feel unusually tired or weak, even with minimal exertion. This symptom is often more pronounced in women.
Dizziness or Lightheadedness:
Feeling faint, dizzy, or lightheaded can occur when blood flow to the brain is reduced. This is a common symptom of a heart attack, especially in the early stages.
Nausea and Sweating:
Nausea, vomiting, or cold sweats may accompany chest pain, especially in women. These symptoms can often be mistaken for gastrointestinal issues.
Pain in Other Areas of the Body:
The pain from a heart attack can radiate to the left arm, neck, jaw, back, or stomach. Some people may experience discomfort in these areas without chest pain.
Warning Signs for Immediate Medical Attention:
Severe chest pain or discomfort that lasts for more than a few minutes, or comes and goes.
Shortness of breath that occurs suddenly or with minimal exertion.
Pain radiating to the arm, neck, jaw, or stomach.
Sudden dizziness, lightheadedness, or fainting.
Nausea and vomiting that occur alongside chest pain.
Cold sweats or excessive sweating without physical exertion.
If any of these symptoms are present, it is crucial to seek medical help immediately. Early intervention can prevent further damage to the heart and increase the chances of survival.

Diagnosis of Myocardial Infarction
Diagnosing myocardial infarction involves a combination of clinical evaluation, laboratory tests, and imaging studies. A healthcare provider will assess the patient’s symptoms, medical history, and risk factors, and may conduct several tests to confirm the diagnosis.

Clinical Evaluation:
Patient History: The doctor will ask about the symptoms, risk factors, and any family history of heart disease.
Physical Examination: A physical exam may reveal signs of a heart attack, such as abnormal heart sounds, low blood pressure, or swelling in the legs.
Diagnostic Tests:
Electrocardiogram (ECG):
An ECG records the electrical activity of the heart and can detect abnormalities in heart rhythm or signs of heart damage caused by a heart attack.
Blood Tests:
Blood tests can detect elevated levels of certain enzymes and proteins, such as troponin, which are released when heart muscle is damaged. High levels of these biomarkers indicate a heart attack.
Echocardiogram:
An echocardiogram uses sound waves to create images of the heart’s structure and function. It can show areas of the heart that are not contracting properly due to a lack of blood flow.
Coronary Angiography:
Coronary angiography involves injecting a contrast dye into the coronary arteries and taking X-ray images to identify blockages or narrowing in the arteries.
Stress Test:
A stress test measures how well the heart performs during physical activity. It can help identify areas of the heart that are not receiving enough blood due to blocked arteries.
Differential Diagnosis: Myocardial infarction shares symptoms with other conditions, such as angina, gastrointestinal issues (e.g., acid reflux), and musculoskeletal pain. A thorough evaluation and diagnostic testing are required to differentiate between these conditions.

Treatment Options for Myocardial Infarction
The treatment for myocardial infarction aims to restore blood flow to the heart, relieve pain, and prevent complications. Treatment options may include medications, surgical interventions, and lifestyle changes.

Medical Treatments:
Aspirin:
Aspirin is often administered immediately during a heart attack to reduce blood clotting and prevent further blockage of the coronary arteries.
Thrombolytic Therapy (Clot-Busting Drugs):
Thrombolytic drugs, such as alteplase, are used to dissolve blood clots and restore blood flow to the heart. These medications are typically given in emergency settings if angioplasty is not immediately available.
Antiplatelet Drugs:
Medications like clopidogrel or ticagrelor are used to prevent blood clots from forming in the coronary arteries after a heart attack.
Beta-Blockers:
Beta-blockers reduce the heart’s workload by lowering heart rate and blood pressure, improving heart function after a heart attack.
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitors:
ACE inhibitors help lower blood pressure and reduce the strain on the heart. They are often prescribed after a heart attack to improve recovery and reduce the risk of future heart problems.
Statins:
Statins help lower cholesterol levels and reduce the risk of further plaque buildup in the arteries.
Surgical Treatments:
Angioplasty and Stenting:
Angioplasty involves using a balloon to widen narrowed coronary arteries, and a stent is often placed to keep the artery open.
Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting (CABG):
CABG is a surgical procedure in which a blood vessel from another part of the body is used to bypass a blocked coronary artery, restoring blood flow to the heart.
Non-Pharmacological Treatments:
Cardiac Rehabilitation:
Cardiac rehabilitation programs involve supervised exercise, education, and counseling to help individuals recover from a heart attack and improve cardiovascular health.
Lifestyle Modifications:
Changes in diet, exercise, and smoking cessation are crucial for preventing future heart attacks and improving overall heart health.
Special Considerations:
Pediatric Population: While myocardial infarction is rare in children, it can occur due to genetic conditions or congenital heart defects.
Geriatric Population: Older adults may require adjusted treatment plans to account for comorbidities and medication interactions.
Complications of Myocardial Infarction
If myocardial infarction is left untreated or poorly managed, it can lead to severe complications:

Heart Failure:
A heart attack can damage the heart muscle, leading to heart failure, a condition in which the heart is unable to pump blood effectively.
Arrhythmias:
Abnormal heart rhythms, including ventricular fibrillation, can occur after a heart attack and may be life-threatening.
Cardiogenic Shock:
Cardiogenic shock is a severe condition in which the heart is unable to pump enough blood to meet the body’s needs, leading to organ failure and death if not treated promptly.
Stroke:
A heart attack can increase the risk of blood clots that travel to the brain, causing a stroke.
Pericarditis:
Inflammation of the lining around the heart (pericardium) can occur after a heart attack and cause chest pain.
Prevention of Myocardial Infarction
While some risk factors for myocardial infarction cannot be controlled (e.g., age and genetics), many lifestyle changes can help reduce the risk of developing heart disease:

Healthy Diet:
A diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and healthy fats can reduce the risk of atherosclerosis and heart disease.
Regular Exercise:
Physical activity strengthens the heart, lowers blood pressure, and helps maintain a healthy weight, reducing the risk of heart attack.
Smoking Cessation:
Quitting smoking significantly reduces the risk of heart disease and improves overall heart health.
Managing Chronic Conditions:
Properly managing diabetes, high blood pressure, and high cholesterol can help reduce the risk of myocardial infarction.
Prognosis & Long-Term Outlook
The prognosis for myocardial infarction depends on the severity of the heart attack, the extent of heart damage, 
and how quickly treatment is administered. With early intervention and proper management, many individuals recover and lead active lives.
However, a heart attack can lead to long-term complications, such as heart failure or arrhythmias, requiring ongoing medical care and lifestyle changes.

Diabetes Mellitus(Type 2 & Type 1)

What is diabetes?
Diabetes is a condition that happens when your blood sugar (glucose) is too high. It develops when your pancreas doesn’t make enough insulin or any at all, or when your body isn’t responding to the effects of insulin properly. Diabetes affects people of all ages. Most forms of diabetes are chronic (lifelong), and all forms are manageable with medications and/or lifestyle changes.

Glucose (sugar) mainly comes from carbohydrates in your food and drinks. It’s your body’s go-to source of energy. Your blood carries glucose to all your body’s cells to use for energy.

When glucose is in your bloodstream, it needs help — a “key” — to reach its final destination. This key is insulin (a hormone). If your pancreas isn’t making enough insulin or your body isn’t using it properly, glucose builds up in your bloodstream, causing high blood sugar (hyperglycemia).

Over time, having consistently high blood glucose can cause health problems, such as heart disease, nerve damage and eye issues.

The technical name for diabetes is diabetes mellitus. Another condition shares the term “diabetes” — diabetes insipidus — but they’re distinct. They share the name “diabetes” because they both cause increased thirst and frequent urination. Diabetes insipidus is much rarer than diabetes mellitus.

What are the types of diabetes?
There are several types of diabetes. The most common forms include:

Type 2 diabetes: With this type, your body doesn’t make enough insulin and/or your body’s cells don’t respond normally to the insulin (insulin resistance). This is the most common type of diabetes. It mainly affects adults, but children can have it as well.
Prediabetes: This type is the stage before Type 2 diabetes. Your blood glucose levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be officially diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes.
Type 1 diabetes: This type is an autoimmune disease in which your immune system attacks and destroys insulin-producing cells in your pancreas for unknown reasons. Up to 10% of people who have diabetes have Type 1. It’s usually diagnosed in children and young adults, but it can develop at any age.
Gestational diabetes: This type develops in some people during pregnancy. Gestational diabetes usually goes away after pregnancy. However, if you have gestational diabetes, you’re at a higher risk of developing Type 2 diabetes later in life.
Other types of diabetes include:

Type 3c diabetes: This form of diabetes happens when your pancreas experiences damage (other than autoimmune damage), which affects its ability to produce insulin. Pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer, cystic fibrosis and hemochromatosis can all lead to pancreas damage that causes diabetes. Having your pancreas removed (pancreatectomy) also results in Type 3c.
Latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA): Like Type 1 diabetes, LADA also results from an autoimmune reaction, but it develops much more slowly than Type 1. People diagnosed with LADA are usually over the age of 30.
Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY): MODY, also called monogenic diabetes, happens due to an inherited genetic mutation that affects how your body makes and uses insulin. There are currently over 10 different types of MODY. It affects up to 5% of people with diabetes and commonly runs in families.
Neonatal diabetes: This is a rare form of diabetes that occurs within the first six months of life. It’s also a form of monogenic diabetes. About 50% of babies with neonatal diabetes have the lifelong form called permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus. For the other half, the condition disappears within a few months from onset, but it can come back later in life. This is called transient neonatal diabetes mellitus.
Brittle diabetes: Brittle diabetes is a form of Type 1 diabetes that’s marked by frequent and severe episodes of high and low blood sugar levels. This instability often leads to hospitalization. In rare cases, a pancreas transplant may be necessary to permanently treat brittle diabetes.
How common is diabetes?
Diabetes is common. Approximately 37.3 million people in the United States have diabetes, which is about 11% of the population. Type 2 diabetes is the most common form, representing 90% to 95% of all diabetes cases.

About 537 million adults across the world have diabetes. Experts predict this number will rise to 643 million by 2030 and 783 million by 2045.

Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of diabetes include increased thirst, frequent urination and slow-healing cuts and sores.
The severity of symptoms can vary based on the type of diabetes you have. These symptoms are usually more intense in Type 1 diabetes than Type 2 diabetes.
What are the symptoms of diabetes?
Symptoms of diabetes include:

Increased thirst (polydipsia) and dry mouth.
Frequent urination.
Fatigue.
Blurred vision.
Unexplained weight loss.
Numbness or tingling in your hands or feet.
Slow-healing sores or cuts.
Frequent skin and/or vaginal yeast infections.
It’s important to talk to your healthcare provider if you or your child has these symptoms.

Additional details about symptoms per type of diabetes include:

Type 1 diabetes: Symptoms of T1D can develop quickly — over a few weeks or months. You may develop additional symptoms that are signs of a severe complication called diabetes-related ketoacidosis (DKA). DKA is life-threatening and requires immediate medical treatment. DKA symptoms include vomiting, stomach pains, fruity-smelling breath and labored breathing.
Type 2 diabetes and prediabetes: You may not have any symptoms at all, or you may not notice them since they develop slowly. Routine bloodwork may show a high blood sugar level before you recognize symptoms. Another possible sign of prediabetes is darkened skin on certain parts of your body (acanthosis nigricans).
Gestational diabetes: You typically won’t notice symptoms of gestational diabetes. Your healthcare provider will test you for gestational diabetes between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy.
What causes diabetes?
Too much glucose circulating in your bloodstream causes diabetes, regardless of the type. However, the reason why your blood glucose levels are high differs depending on the type of diabetes.

Causes of diabetes include:

Insulin resistance: Type 2 diabetes mainly results from insulin resistance. Insulin resistance happens when cells in your muscles, fat and liver don’t respond as they should to insulin. Several factors and conditions contribute to varying degrees of insulin resistance, including obesity, lack of physical activity, diet, hormonal imbalances, genetics and certain medications.
Autoimmune disease: Type 1 diabetes and LADA happen when your immune system attacks the insulin-producing cells in your pancreas.
Hormonal imbalances: During pregnancy, the placenta releases hormones that cause insulin resistance. You may develop gestational diabetes if your pancreas can’t produce enough insulin to overcome the insulin resistance. Other hormone-related conditions like acromegaly and Cushing syndrome can also cause Type 2 diabetes.
Pancreatic damage: Physical damage to your pancreas — from a condition, surgery or injury — can impact its ability to make insulin, resulting in Type 3c diabetes.
Genetic mutations: Certain genetic mutations can cause MODY and neonatal diabetes.
Long-term use of certain medications can also lead to Type 2 diabetes, including HIV/AIDS medications and corticosteroids.

What are the complications of diabetes?
Diabetes can lead to acute (sudden and severe) and long-term complications — mainly due to extreme or prolonged high blood sugar levels.

Acute diabetes complications
Acute diabetes complications that can be life-threatening include:

Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS): This complication mainly affects people with Type 2 diabetes. It happens when your blood sugar levels are very high (over 600 milligrams per deciliter or mg/dL) for a long period, leading to severe dehydration and confusion. It requires immediate medical treatment.
Diabetes-related ketoacidosis (DKA): This complication mainly affects people with Type 1 diabetes or undiagnosed T1D. It happens when your body doesn’t have enough insulin. If your body doesn’t have insulin, it can’t use glucose for energy, so it breaks down fat instead. This process eventually releases substances called ketones, which turn your blood acidic. This causes labored breathing, vomiting and loss of consciousness. DKA requires immediate medical treatment.
Severe low blood sugar (hypoglycemia): Hypoglycemia happens when your blood sugar level drops below the range that’s healthy for you. Severe hypoglycemia is very low blood sugar. It mainly affects people with diabetes who use insulin. Signs include blurred or double vision, clumsiness, disorientation and seizures. It requires treatment with emergency glucagon and/or medical intervention.
Long-term diabetes complications
Blood glucose levels that remain high for too long can damage your body’s tissues and organs. This is mainly due to damage to your blood vessels and nerves, which support your body’s tissues.

Cardiovascular (heart and blood vessel) issues are the most common type of long-term diabetes complication. They include:

Coronary artery disease.
Heart attack.
Stroke.
Atherosclerosis.
Other diabetes complications include:

Nerve damage (neuropathy), which can cause numbness, tingling and/or pain.
Nephropathy, which can lead to kidney failure or the need for dialysis or transplant.
Retinopathy, which can lead to blindness.
Diabetes-related foot conditions.
Skin infections.
Amputations.
Sexual dysfunction due to nerve and blood vessel damage, such as erectile dysfunction or vaginal dryness.
Gastroparesis.
Hearing loss.
Oral health issues, such as gum (periodontal) disease.
Living with diabetes can also affect your mental health. People with diabetes are two to three times more likely to have depression than people without diabetes.

Diagnosis and Tests
How is diabetes diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose diabetes by checking your glucose level in a blood test. Three tests can measure your blood glucose level:

Fasting blood glucose test: For this test, you don’t eat or drink anything except water (fast) for at least eight hours before the test. As food can greatly affect blood sugar, this test allows your provider to see your baseline blood sugar.
Random blood glucose test: “Random” means that you can get this test at any time, regardless of if you’ve fasted.
A1c: This test, also called HbA1C or glycated hemoglobin test, provides your average blood glucose level over the past two to three months.
To screen for and diagnose gestational diabetes, providers order an oral glucose tolerance test.

The following test results typically indicate if you don’t have diabetes, have prediabetes or have diabetes. These values may vary slightly. In addition, healthcare providers rely on more than one test to diagnose diabetes.

Type of test	In-range (mg/dL)	Prediabetes (mg/dL)	Diabetes (mg/L)
Fasting blood glucose test	Less than 100.	100 to 125.	126 or higher.
Random blood glucose test	N/A.	N/A.	200 or higher (with classic symptoms of hyperglycemia or hyperglycemic crisis).
A1c	Less than 5.7%.	5.7% to 6.4%.	6.5% or higher.
Management and Treatment
How is diabetes managed?
Diabetes is a complex condition, so its management involves several strategies. In addition, diabetes affects everyone differently, so management plans are highly individualized.

The four main aspects of managing diabetes include:

Blood sugar monitoring: Monitoring your blood sugar (glucose) is key to determining how well your current treatment plan is working. It gives you information on how to manage your diabetes on a daily — and sometimes even hourly — basis. You can monitor your levels with frequent checks with a glucose meter and finger stick and/or with a continuous glucose monitor (CGM). You and your healthcare provider will determine the best blood sugar range for you.
Oral diabetes medications: Oral diabetes medications (taken by mouth) help manage blood sugar levels in people who have diabetes but still produce some insulin — mainly people with Type 2 diabetes and prediabetes. People with gestational diabetes may also need oral medication. There are several different types. Metformin is the most common.
Insulin: People with Type 1 diabetes need to inject synthetic insulin to live and manage diabetes. Some people with Type 2 diabetes also require insulin. There are several different types of synthetic insulin. They each start to work at different speeds and last in your body for different lengths of time. The four main ways you can take insulin include injectable insulin with a syringe (shot), insulin pens, insulin pumps and rapid-acting inhaled insulin.
Diet: Meal planning and choosing a healthy diet for you are key aspects of diabetes management, as food greatly impacts blood sugar. If you take insulin, counting carbs in the food and drinks you consume is a large part of management. The amount of carbs you eat determines how much insulin you need at meals. Healthy eating habits can also help you manage your weight and reduce your heart disease risk.
Exercise: Physical activity increases insulin sensitivity (and helps reduce insulin resistance), so regular exercise is an important part of management for all people with diabetes.
Due to the increased risk for heart disease, it’s also important to maintain a healthy:

Weight.
Blood pressure.
Cholesterol.
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for diabetes?
The prognosis (outlook) for diabetes varies greatly depending on several factors, including:

The type of diabetes.
How well you manage the condition over time and your access to diabetes care.
Your age at diagnosis/how long you’ve had diabetes.
If you have other health conditions.
If you develop diabetes complications.
Chronic high blood sugar can cause severe complications, which are usually irreversible. Several studies have shown that untreated chronic high blood sugar shortens your lifespan and worsens your quality of life.

In the United States, diabetes is the eighth leading cause of death. A large number of people with diabetes will die from a heart attack or stroke.

However, it’s important to know that you can live a healthy life with diabetes. The following are key to a better prognosis:

Lifestyle changes.
Regular exercise.
Dietary changes.
Regular blood sugar monitoring.
Studies show that people with diabetes may be able to reduce their risk of complications by consistently keeping their A1c levels below 7%.

Prevention
How can I prevent diabetes?
You can’t prevent autoimmune and genetic forms of diabetes. But there are some steps you can take to lower your risk for developing prediabetes, Type 2 diabetes and gestational diabetes, including:

Eat a healthy diet, such as the Mediterranean diet.
Get physically active. Aim for 30 minutes a day at least five days a week.
Work to achieve a weight that’s healthy for you.
Manage your stress.
Limit alcohol intake.
Get adequate sleep (typically 7 to 9 hours) and seek treatment for sleep disorders.
Quit smoking.
Take medications as directed by your healthcare provider to manage existing risk factors for heart disease.
It’s important to note that there are some diabetes risk factors you can’t change, such as your genetics/family history, age and race. Know that Type 2 diabetes is a complex condition that involves many contributing factors.

Obesity
Obesity is classified by the World Health Organization (WHO) as a chronic, relapsing disease arising from complex interactions between genetics, neurobiology, eating behaviours, access to healthy diet, 
market forces, and the broader environment. In the last decades, obesity has expanded globally as countries have experienced greater food security, socioeconomic development, and shifts in diet, physical activity, 
and societal and individual behavior driven by globalization and industrialized food systems. These forces have created increasingly obesogenic environments,
 contributing to what is now a global public health crisis with more than 1 billion people living with obesity and prevalence rising in nearly every country (1).
A diagnosis of overweight or obesity is made by measuring people’s weight and height and by calculating the body mass index (BMI): weight (kg)/height² (m²). 
The body mass index is a surrogate marker of fatness and additional measurements, such as the waist circumference, can help the diagnosis of obesity.

The BMI categories for defining obesity vary by age and gender for adults, adolescents, children and infants.
Definition of overweight and obesity
WHO defines overweight and obesity as outlined below.
Adults
For adults:
overweight is a BMI greater than or equal to 25; and
obesity is a BMI greater than or equal to 30.
Children
For children, age needs to be considered when defining overweight and obesity.
Children aged between 5–19 years
For children aged 5–19 years:
overweight is BMI-for-age greater than 1 standard deviation above the WHO Growth Reference median; and
obesity is greater than 2 standard deviations above the WHO Growth Reference median.
Charts and tables: WHO growth reference for children aged between 5–19 years
Children under 5 years of age
For children under 5 years of age:
overweight is weight-for-height greater than 2 standard deviations above WHO Child Growth Standards median; and
obesity is weight-for-height greater than 3 standard deviations above the WHO Child Growth Standards median.
Charts and tables: WHO child growth standards for children aged under 5 years
Prevalence of overweight and obesity
In 2022, 2.5 billion adults aged 18 years and older were overweight, including over 890 million adults who were living with obesity (1). 
This corresponds to 43% of adults aged 18 years and over (43% of men and 44% of women) who were overweight; this is an increase from 1990, when 25% of adults aged 18 years and over were overweight. 
Prevalence of overweight varied by region, from 31% in the WHO South-East Asia Region and the African Region to 67% in the Region of the Americas.
About 16% of adults aged 18 years and older worldwide were obese in 2022. The worldwide prevalence of obesity more than doubled between 1990 and 2022.

In 2024, an estimated 35 million children under the age of 5 years were overweight (2). Once considered a high-income country problem,
 overweight is on the rise in low- and middle-income countries. In Africa, the number of overweight children under 5 years has increased by nearly 12.1% since 2000. 
Almost half of the children under 5 years who were overweight or living with obesity in 2024 lived in Asia.
Over 390 million children and adolescents aged 5–19 years were overweight in 2022. 
The prevalence of overweight (including obesity) among children and adolescents aged 5–19 has risen dramatically from just 8% in 1990 to 20% in 2022.
The rise has occurred similarly among both boys and girls: in 2022 19% of girls and 21% of boys were overweight.

While just 2% of children and adolescents aged 5–19 were living with obesity in 1990 (31 million young people), by 2022, 8% of children and adolescents were living with obesity (over 160 million young people).
Causes of overweight and obesity
Overweight and obesity result from an imbalance of energy intake (diet) and energy expenditure (physical activity).
In most cases obesity is a multifactorial disease due to environmental and psycho-social factors and genetic variants.
 In a subgroup of patients, single major etiological factors can be identified (e.g. medications, diseases, immobilization, iatrogenic procedures, and monogenic disease/genetic syndrome).
Key environmental factors affecting the prevalence of overweight and obesity are those that limit the availability of healthy and
 sustainably-produced food at locally affordable prices spaces for physical activity and the absence of adequate legal and regulatory environments.
A further factor is the lack of an effective health system response to identify excess weight gain and fat deposition at an early stage.

Common health consequences
The health risks caused by overweight and obesity are increasingly well documented and understood.
In 2021, higher-than-optimal BMI caused an estimated 3.7 million deaths from noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) such as cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, 
cancers, neurological disorders, chronic respiratory diseases, and digestive disorders (3).
Being overweight in childhood and adolescence affects children’s and adolescents’ health and is associated with greater risk and earlier onset of various NCDs, 
such as type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Childhood and adolescent obesity have adverse psychosocial consequences; they affects school performance and quality of life, 
compounded by stigma, discrimination and bullying. Children with obesity are very likely to become adults with obesity and are also at a higher risk of developing NCDs in adulthood.

The economic impacts of the obesity epidemic are also important. If nothing is done, the global costs of overweight and obesity are predicted to reach US$ 3 trillion per year by 2030 and more than US$ 18 trillion by 2060 (4).

Finally, the rise in obesity rates in low-and middle-income countries, including among lower socio-economic groups, is fast globalizing a problem that was once associated only with high-income countries.

Facing a double burden of malnutrition
Many low- and middle-income countries face a so-called double burden of malnutrition.

While these countries continue to deal with the problems of infectious diseases and undernutrition, they are also experiencing a rapid upsurge in noncommunicable disease risk factors such as obesity and overweight.

It is common to find undernutrition and obesity co-existing within the same country, the same community and the same household.

Children in low- and middle-income countries are more vulnerable to inadequate pre-natal, infant, and young child nutrition. At the same time, these children are exposed to high-fat, high-sugar, high-salt, energy-dense, and micronutrient-poor foods, which tend to be lower in cost but also lower in nutrient quality. These dietary patterns, in conjunction with lower levels of physical activity, result in sharp increases in childhood obesity while undernutrition issues remain unsolved.

Prevention and management
Overweight and obesity, as well as their related noncommunicable diseases, are largely preventable and manageable.

At the individual level, people may be able to reduce their risk by adopting preventive interventions at each step of the life cycle, starting from pre-conception and continuing during the early years. These include:

ensure appropriate weight gain during pregnancy;
practice exclusive breastfeeding in the first 6 months after birth and continued breastfeeding until 24 months or beyond;
support behaviours of children around healthy eating, physical activity, sedentary behaviours and sleep, regardless of current weight status;
limit screen time;
limit consumption of sugar sweetened beverages and energy-dense foods and promote other healthy eating behaviours;
enjoy a healthy life (healthy diet, physical activity, sleep duration and quality, avoid tobacco and alcohol, emotional self-regulation);
limit energy intake from total fats and sugars and increase consumption of fruit and vegetables, as well as legumes, whole grains and nuts; and
engage in regular physical activity.
Health practitioners need to:

assess the weight and height of people accessing health facilities;
provide counselling on healthy diet and lifestyles;
when a diagnosis of obesity is established, advise on management of the disorder, including through healthy diet and regular physical activity, and explain and offer, as appropriate, available therapeutic and surgical measures; and
monitor other NCD risk factors (blood glucose, lipids and blood pressure) and assess the presence of comorbidities and disability, including mental health disorders.
Dietary and physical activity patterns are largely the result of environmental and societal conditions that greatly constrain personal choice. Obesity is a societal rather than an individual responsibility, with the solutions to be found through the creation of supportive environments and communities that embed healthy diets and regular physical activity as the most accessible, available and affordable behaviours of daily life.

Stopping the rise in obesity demands multisectoral actions in areas such as food manufacturing, marketing and pricing and others that seek to address the wider determinants of health (such as poverty reduction and urban planning).

Such policies and actions include:

structural, fiscal and regulatory actions aimed at creating healthy food environments that make healthier food options available, accessible and desirable; and
health sector responses designed and equipped to identify risk, prevent, treat and manage the disease. These actions need to build upon and be integrated into broader efforts to address NCDs and strengthen health systems through a primary health care approach.
The food industry can play a significant role in promoting healthy diets by:

reducing the fat, sugar and salt content of processed foods;
ensuring that healthy and nutritious choices are available and affordable to all consumers;
restricting marketing of foods high in sugars, salt and fats, especially those foods aimed at children and teenagers; and
ensuring the availability of healthy food choices and supporting regular physical activity practice in the workplace.

Stroke

A stroke is a medical emergency that occurs when blood flow to the brain is interrupted, either due to a blockage or bleeding. This lack of blood flow can lead to brain cell death and serious complications. Strokes can be fatal and need immediate treatment.

The types of strokes are:

ischaemic stroke: a blood clot blocks a blood vessel in your brain leading to loss of blood flow;
haemorrhagic stroke: intracerebral haemorrhage (ICH) by rupture of a blood vessel in the brain leading to bleeding; and
transient ischaemic attack (TIA): a short period of symptoms similar to those of a stroke, caused by a brief blockage of blood flow to the brain. A TIA usually lasts only a few minutes and doesn't cause long-term damage.
Risk factors
There are by modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors for stroke.

Modifiable risk factors are:

hypertension: the leading contributor to stroke. Individuals with hypertension have a nearly three times higher risk of stroke compared to those without hypertension;
tobacco use: associated with approximately two-fifths of all stroke deaths among individuals under the age of 65; and
other risk factors: high blood cholesterol, diabetes mellitus, high levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, overweight and obesity, physical inactivity, unhealthy diet (particularly diets high in sodium and low in fruits and vegetables), harmful use of alcohol, use of illicit drugs (e.g. cocaine), air pollution, high fasting blood glucose and kidney dysfunction.
Non‑modifiable risk factors are:

age
a prior stroke
pre-existing cardiac conditions (e.g. atrial fibrillation, heart failure), and chronic kidney disease.
Symptoms
The following symptoms can be signs of stroke:

balance – sudden dizziness, loss of balance or coordination
eyes – sudden vision loss
face – facial droop
arms – weakness in one or both arms
speech – slurred or strange speech.
Diagnosis and treatment
When a stroke is suspected, it should be treated as a health emergency. Rapid care is essential. Immediate diagnostic imagining (a CT or MRI scan) should be carried out as soon as possible.

In the case of ischaemic stroke, thrombolytic therapy (e.g. tPA) should be carried out as soon as possible, and within hours of symptom onset. An endovascular thrombectomy may be indicated, depending on the severity and location of symptoms.

In the case of haemorrhagic stroke, management includes action to control blood pressure; intensive care in a specialized stroke unit; and possibly surgical intervention.

Admission to a specialist stroke unit with rehabilitation services enhances outcomes and decreases mortality and morbidity.

Prevention
Lifestyle changes and effective management of high blood pressure can significantly reduce the risk of stroke.

Everyone can reduce their risk of stroke by:

controlling high blood pressure through a healthy lifestyle and appropriate antihypertensive treatment;
reducing tobacco use and limiting exposure to second-hand smoke;
adopting a healthy balanced diet, including at least five servings of fruit and vegetables daily and reducing intake of salt, saturated fats, and sugars;
engaging in regular physical activity, aiming for at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise per week;
effectively managing comorbid conditions such as diabetes, dyslipidaemia, and atrial fibrillation;
limiting use of alcohol; and
improving indoor and outdoor air quality.
Action can also be taken for individuals at particular risk:

antiplatelet therapy or anticoagulants can be given, as appropriate, to prevent recurrent strokes;
lipid-lowering therapy can be initiated for individuals at risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; and
assessment for carotid artery stenosis can be carried out and when clinically indicated, revascularization (a medical procedure aimed at restoring the blood flow to the brain when the flow is limited or there is a blockage, as in ischemic stroke) can be considered.
Complications
Stroke can lead to a wide range of complications, including serious effects on the brain, heart and other parts of the body.

Acute complications (that appear within days to weeks) are:

brain oedema or swelling of the brain
aphasia or other speech disorders
trouble swallowing (dysphagia)
aspiration pneumonia, a lung infection
seizure
depression
pressure ulcers
limb contracture
spasticity
shoulder pain
deep venous thrombosis.
Long-term complications (months to years) are:

persistent motor deficits and gait disturbances (abnormalities in movement and walking pattern)
chronic pain and spasticity
cognitive impairment and memory loss
emotional and psychological conditions, including depression and anxiety
post-stroke epilepsy
urinary incontinence
loss of independence and reduced ability to perform daily activities.
Rehabilitation after stroke
Rehabilitation is a critical component of stroke care and recovery. It aims to help individuals regain functional abilities, improve quality of life, and restore independence to the greatest extent possible. Stroke rehabilitation should begin as soon as the person is medically stable – ideally within the first few days after the stroke.

Rehabilitation involves a multidisciplinary approach, including:

physiotherapy to improve mobility, muscle strength, balance, and coordination;
occupational therapy to enhance the ability to perform daily activities such as bathing, dressing, and cooking;
speech and language therapy to address difficulties with communication, speech, and swallowing;
neuropsychological and cognitive therapy to support cognitive function, memory, and emotional well-being; and
psychological support and counselling to address depression, anxiety, and emotional adjustment after stroke.

Asthma

Asthma is a chronic lung disease affecting people of all ages. It is caused by inflammation and muscle tightening around the airways, which makes it harder to breathe.

Symptoms can include coughing, wheezing, shortness of breath and chest tightness. These symptoms can be mild or severe and can come and go over time.

Although asthma can be a serious condition, it can be managed with the right treatment. People with symptoms of asthma should speak to a health professional.

Impact
Asthma is often under-diagnosed and under-treated, particularly in low- and middle-income countries.

People with under-treated asthma can suffer sleep disturbance, tiredness during the day, and poor concentration. Asthma sufferers and their families may miss school and work, with financial impact on the family and wider community. If symptoms are severe, people with asthma may need to receive emergency health care and they may be admitted to hospital for treatment and monitoring. In the most severe cases, asthma can lead to death.

Symptoms
Symptoms of asthma can vary from person to person. Symptoms sometimes get significantly worse. This is known as an asthma attack. Symptoms are often worse at night or during exercise.

Common symptoms of asthma include:

a persistent cough, especially at night
wheezing when exhaling and sometimes when inhaling
shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, sometimes even when resting
chest tightness, making it difficult to breathe deeply.
Some people will have worse symptoms when they have a cold or during changes in the weather. Other triggers can include dust, smoke, fumes, grass and tree pollen, animal fur and feathers, strong soaps and perfume.

Symptoms can be caused by other conditions as well. People with symptoms should talk to a healthcare provider.

Causes
Many factors have been linked to an increased risk of developing asthma, although it is often difficult to find a single, direct cause.

Asthma is more likely if other family members also have asthma – particularly a close relative, such as a parent or sibling.
Asthma is more likely in people who have other allergic conditions, such as eczema and rhinitis (hay fever).
Urbanization is associated with increased asthma prevalence, probably due to multiple lifestyle factors.
Events in early life affect the developing lungs and can increase the risk of asthma. These include low birth weight, prematurity, exposure to tobacco smoke and other sources of air pollution, as well as viral respiratory infections.
Exposure to a range of environmental allergens and irritants are also thought to increase the risk of asthma, including indoor and outdoor air pollution, house dust mites, moulds, and occupational exposure to chemicals, fumes or dust.
Children and adults who are overweight or obese are at a greater risk of asthma.
Treatment
Asthma cannot be cured but there are several treatments available. The most common treatment is to use an inhaler, which delivers medication directly to the lungs.

Inhalers can help control the disease and enable people with asthma to enjoy a normal, active life.

There are two main types of inhaler:

bronchodilators (such as salbutamol), that open the air passages and relieve symptoms; and
steroids (such as beclometasone) that reduce inflammation in the air passages, which improves asthma symptoms and reduces the risk of severe asthma attacks and death.
People with asthma may need to use their inhaler every day. Their treatment will depend on the frequency of symptoms and the types of inhalers available.

Using an inhaler can be difficult, especially for children and during emergency situations. Using a spacer device makes it easier to use an aerosol inhaler. This helps the medicine to reach the lungs more easily. A spacer is a plastic container with a mouthpiece or mask at one end and a hole for the inhaler in the other. A homemade spacer, made from a 500ml plastic bottle, can be as effective as commercially manufactured spacers. 

Access to inhalers is a problem in many countries. In 2021, bronchodilators were available in public primary health care facilities in half of low- and low-middle income countries, and steroid inhalers available in one third.  

It is also important to raise community awareness to reduce the myths and stigma associated with asthma in some settings.

Self-care
People with asthma and their families need education to understand more about their asthma. This includes their treatment options, triggers to avoid, and how to manage their symptoms at home.

It is important for people with asthma to know how to increase their treatment when their symptoms are worsening to avoid a serious attack. Healthcare providers may give an asthma action plan to help people with asthma to take greater control of their treatment. 

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common lung disease causing restricted airflow and breathing problems. It is sometimes called emphysema or chronic bronchitis.

In people with COPD, the lungs can get damaged or clogged with phlegm. Symptoms include cough, sometimes with phlegm, difficulty breathing, wheezing and tiredness.

Smoking and air pollution are the most common causes of COPD. People with COPD are at higher risk of other health problems.

COPD is not curable but symptoms can improve if one avoids smoking and exposure to air pollution and gets vaccines to prevent infections. It can also be treated with medicines, oxygen and pulmonary rehabilitation.

Symptoms
The most common symptoms of COPD are difficulty breathing, chronic cough (sometimes with phlegm) and feeling tired.

COPD symptoms can get worse quickly. These are called flare-ups. These usually last for a few days and often require additional medicine.

People with COPD also have a higher risk for other health problems. These include:

lung infections, like the flu or pneumonia
lung cancer
heart problems
weak muscles and brittle bones
depression and anxiety.
Common symptoms of COPD develop from mid-life onwards. As COPD progresses, people find it more difficult to carry out their normal daily activities, often due to breathlessness. There may be a considerable financial burden due to limitation of workplace and home productivity, and costs of medical treatment.

COPD is sometimes called emphysema or chronic bronchitis. Emphysema usually refers to destruction of the tiny air sacs at the end of the airways in the lungs. Chronic bronchitis refers to a chronic cough with the production of phlegm resulting from inflammation in the airways. COPD and asthma share common symptoms (cough, wheeze and difficulty breathing) and people may have both conditions.

Causes
Several processes can cause the airways to become narrow and lead to COPD. There may be destruction of parts of the lung, mucus blocking the airways, and inflammation and swelling of the airway lining.

COPD develops gradually over time, often resulting from a combination of risk factors:

tobacco exposure from active smoking or passive exposure to second-hand smoke;
occupational exposure to dusts, fumes or chemicals;
indoor air pollution: biomass fuel (wood, animal dung, crop residue) or coal is frequently used for cooking and heating in low- and middle-income countries with high levels of smoke exposure; 
early life events such as poor growth in utero, prematurity, and frequent or severe respiratory infections in childhood that prevent maximum lung growth;
asthma in childhood; and
a rare genetic condition called alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, which can cause COPD at a young age.
COPD should be suspected if a person has typical symptoms, and the diagnosis confirmed by a breathing test called spirometry, which measures how the lungs are working. In low- and middle-income countries, spirometry is often not available and so the diagnosis may be missed. 

Treatment
COPD isn’t curable, but it can get better by not smoking, avoiding air pollution and getting vaccines. It can be treated with medicines, oxygen and pulmonary rehabilitation.

There are several treatments available for COPD.

Inhaled medicines that open and reduce swelling in the airways are the main treatments.

Bronchodilator inhalers are the most important medicines for treating COPD. They relax the airways to keep them open.

Short-acting bronchodilators start to work in seconds and can last for 4–6 hours. These are often used during flare-ups.

Long-acting bronchodilators take longer to start working but last longer. These are taken daily and can be combined with inhaled steroids.

Other treatments may also be used:

Steroid pills and antibiotics are often used to treat flare-ups.
Oxygen is used for people who have had COPD for a long time or have severe COPD.
Pulmonary rehabilitation teaches exercises to improve your breathing and ability to exercise.
Surgery may improve symptoms for some people with severe COPD.
Some inhalers open the airways and may be given regularly to prevent or reduce symptoms, and to relieve symptoms during acute flare-ups. Inhaled corticosteroids are sometimes given in combination with these to reduce inflammation in the lungs. 

Inhalers must be taken using the correct technique, and in some cases with a spacer device to help deliver the medication into the airways more effectively. Access to inhalers is limited in many low- and middle-income countries; in 2021 salbutamol inhalers were generally available in public primary health care facilities in half of low- and low-middle income countries.

Flare-ups are often caused by a respiratory infection, and people may be given an antibiotic or steroid tablets in addition to inhaled or nebulised treatment as needed. 

Living with COPD
Lifestyle changes can help improve symptoms of COPD.

Quit smoking or vaping. This is the most important thing to do. Even if you have been smoking for many years, quitting can still help.

Avoid second-hand smoke or smoke from indoor cooking fires.

Stay physically active.

Protect yourself from lung infections:

Get a flu vaccine every year.
Get the pneumonia vaccine.
Get all available COVID-19 vaccines and make sure you have had the latest boosters.
People living with COPD must be given information about their condition, treatment and self-care to help them to stay as active and healthy as possible.

Pneumonia

Pneumonia is a lung infection that causes the air sacs in one or both lungs to become inflamed. Cough with phlegm or pus, fever, chills, and trouble breathing can occur when the air sacs fill with fluid or pus (purulent material). Pneumonia can be caused by a variety of species, including bacteria, viruses, and fungus.

Pneumonia, both viral and bacterial, is contagious. This means that they can be passed from person to person by inhaling airborne droplets from a sneeze or cough. These types of pneumonia can also be contracted by coming into touch with surfaces or items contaminated with pneumonia-causing bacteria or viruses. Fungal pneumonia can be contracted from the environment. It does not pass from one person to the next.

Pneumonia is further divided into categories based on how or where it was acquired:

Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) – This kind of bacterial pneumonia is contracted while in the hospital. Because the bacteria implicated may be more resistant to drugs than other varieties, it can be more dangerous.
Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) – Pneumonia obtained outside of a medical or institutional setting is referred to as this.
Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) – VAP is a type of pneumonia that affects patients who use a ventilator.
Aspiration pneumonia – Aspiration pneumonia is caused by inhaling microorganisms from food, drink, or saliva into your lungs. If you have a swallowing difficulty or are excessively sedated from the use of medications, alcohol, or other drugs, it’s more likely to happen.
Walking pneumonia
Walking pneumonia is a type of pneumonia that is less severe. Walking pneumonia patients may be unaware that they have the disease. It’s possible that their symptoms are more akin to a minor respiratory illness than pneumonia. Walking pneumonia, on the other hand, may necessitate a lengthier recuperation time.

The following are some of the symptoms of walking pneumonia:

a low-grade fever
a dry cough that lasts more than a week 
chills
Breathing problems
chest discomfort
decreased appetite
Pneumonia is commonly caused by viruses and bacteria such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae. Walking pneumonia, on the other hand, is most usually caused by the bacteria Mycoplasma pneumoniae.

Stages of pneumonia
Pneumonia can be characterized according to the part of the lungs it affects:

Bronchopneumonia – Bronchopneumonia can damage portions of your lungs on both sides. It’s usually seen at or around your bronchi. The tubes that connect your windpipe to your lungs are known as bronchioles.
Lobar pneumonia – One or more lobes of your lungs are affected by lobar pneumonia. Lungs are divided into lobes, which are distinct regions of the lung. Based on how far illness has progressed, lobar pneumonia can be categorized into four stages:
Congestion – The lungs appear thick and clogged. Infectious organisms have accumulated in the fluid that has accumulated in the air sacs.
Red Hepatization – The fluid has been contaminated with red blood cells and immune cells. The lungs appear red and solid as a result of this.
Gray hepatization – It is a term used to describe the process of a person’ Red blood cells are starting to break down, but immune cells are still present. The hue of red blood cells changes from red to grey as they break down.
Resolution – The infection is being cleared by immune cells. A productive cough aids in the ejection of any remaining liquid from the lungs.
Pneumonia occurs when bacteria enter the lungs and produce an illness. The immune system’s response to the infection causes inflammation of the air sacs in the lungs (alveoli). The air sacs might eventually fill up with pus and liquids as a result of the inflammation, resulting in pneumonia symptoms. Pneumonia can be caused by a variety of infectious organisms, including bacteria, viruses, and fungus.

Bacterial pneumonia
Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most prevalent cause of bacterial pneumonia. Other factors to consider are:

Mycoplasma pneumoniae is a bacterium that causes pneumonia.
Haemophilus influenza is an infectious disease caused by the bacteria Haemophilus influenza
Legionella pneumophila is a kind of Legionella bacteria.
Viral pneumonia
Pneumonia is frequently caused by respiratory viruses. Pneumonia can be caused by a variety of viral infections, including:

Influenza pandemic (flu)
RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) is a virus that causes respiratory (RSV)
Viruses that cause rhinorrhea (common cold)
Infection with the human parainfluenza virus (HPIV).
Infection with the human metapneumovirus (HMPV)
Measles
Chickenpox is a disease caused by chickens (varicella-zoster virus)
Infection with the adenovirus or coronavirus
Despite the similarities in symptoms between viral and bacterial pneumonia, viral pneumonia is frequently milder. Without treatment, it can improve in 1 to 3 weeks. People with viral pneumonia are at risk of acquiring bacterial pneumonia, according to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.

Fungal pneumonia
Pneumonia can be caused by fungi found in soil or bird droppings. People with compromised immune systems are more likely to develop pneumonia as a result of them. Fungi that might cause pneumonia include the following:

Pneumocystis jirovecii 
Species of Cryptococcus
Species of histoplasmosis
The less common causes of bacterial pneumonia are:
Haemophilus influenza type B (Hib) causes pneumonia in children less than 5 years of age. It can also cause other infections like meningitis, and ear infections. However, due to Hib vaccinations, these infections are now less common.
Moraxella catarrhalis is seen as a part of the harmless bacteria of our mouth and throat. But it can cause pneumonia in children and adults with other lung diseases like Asthma and COPD. Usually, it causes ear infections and sinusitis in children.
Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia is more common in hospitalized patients or following the viral flu. These infections can become severe and difficult to treat as they are resistant to multiple antibiotics.
Klebsiella pneumonia can cause pneumonia in hospitalized patients on a ventilator. It can also cause pneumonia in alcoholics.
Streptococcus agalactiae (Group B strep) is a bacteria seen in the female vagina. They can be passed from a pregnant woman to her baby during childbirth and cause severe infections in the newborns. They can also cause infections in the elderly who have diabetes or neurological disease.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa can cause pneumonia in individuals with decreased lung function like cystic fibrosis, individuals with low immunity and hospitalized individuals.
Based on the geographical location of the individual, the type of bacteria causing the infection could vary. In such cases, travelers and tourists who migrate from certain countries may be exposed to bacteria types that are less common in their own geographical location. In some cases, a person may be exposed and become vulnerable to a rare type of bacterial pneumonia due to his weakened immune system or an underlying health condition.

Symptoms of pneumonia vary based on the age of the affected individual, his or her health condition and the type of microorganism that is causing the infection.

In newborn babies, the common symptoms are wheezing, grunting, breathing rapidly, irritability and lethargic behavior. Mild symptoms of pneumonia resemble that of a regular cold or flu but they tend to last longer.

Common symptoms of pneumonia include:
Fever, chills, and sweating
Cough, with or without phlegm
Chest pain
Difficulty in breathing
Nausea and vomiting
Bronchitis treatment
Muscle pains
Headache
Fatigue
Confusion
Pneumonia can progress and become life-threatening in some individuals. And hence, with medical assistance must be initiated as early as possible.

Pneumonia can occur in anyone but the following individuals are at highest risk.

Children below 2 years of age
Adults over 65 years of age
Hospitalized individuals: Hospitalisation increases the risk of exposure to micro-organisms, especially in those who require a ventilator.
Presence of chronic diseases: Having chronic diseases like asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or heart diseases can make an individual more vulnerable to pneumonia.
Smoking: Smoking usually results in the damage of the body’s natural defense systems against bacteria and viruses, making individuals more prone to infections like pneumonia.
Weak immune system: People with severe underlying health conditions like HIV/AIDS, those who have had an organ transplant, those on chemotherapy regimen or long-term usage of steroids are at higher risk for pneumonia.
Diagnostic tests for pneumonia detect the presence of pneumonia, the microorganism causing the infection and the extent of damage to the lungs. Diagnosis is also essential to limit the spread of infection, to understand its severity and also as a guide to the treatment that is to be given.

Common infectious organisms are usually difficult to be identified, and therefore the medical history or the patient, identification of common agents in the community and the patient’s clinical presentation are taken into consideration. In cases where symptoms do not resolve after a primary treatment, additional testing may be performed to diagnose and identify less common causes of pneumonia.

Based on the symptoms displayed by the person and his health status, various laboratory tests may be performed for accurate diagnosis. Commonly prescribed diagnostic tests that can be done in a laboratory include:

Complete Blood Count (CBC): The presence of infection may be detected by the number of white blood cells or WBC present in the blood.
Basic Metabolic Panel (BMP): Tests for sodium, potassium and other elements in order to determine the severity of the infection.
Arterial Blood Gases or ABG: This test measures pH and the amount of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood. This is an indication of lung function.
In order to diagnose the presence of bacteria, the common tests prescribed are:
Sputum Culture/Gram Stain: Primary test to identify the bacterial cause of pneumonia. Culture can also identify the antibiotics to which the bacterial agent is susceptible.
AFB Smear and Culture: Tuberculosis can also present like pneumonia. This test is required to identify tuberculosis bacteria in the lungs.
Blood Culture: This test is done when it is suspected that infection has spread from lungs to blood or from blood to the lungs.
Pleural Fluid Analysis: Sometimes fluid collects around the lungs between its coverings. This fluid is tested for identifying the cause of pneumonia.
Special Test:  Special tests can identify specific causes of pneumonia. These include those which cannot be cultured Examples are
Mycoplasma
Legionella
Influenza Tests
RSV Testing
Fungal Tests
Chest X-ray: Chest X-ray detects and evaluates the severity of a lung infection. When a patient has pneumonia, the affected lung may show up on the chest X-ray as patches.

Computed Tomography Scan (CT Scan)  is used to detect and evaluate the structure of the lung and the changes due to pneumonia.

Treatment for pneumonia varies depending on the type and severity of the infection. Various medications for pneumonia include:

Antibiotics: These medicines work on the bacteria. Antibiotics are prescribed by the doctor based on the type of bacteria causing pneumonia. If the symptoms fail to ease, replacement of antibiotics is done.
Cough Medicine: Severe coughing can be troublesome for patients. Cough medication reduces cough and helps the patient rest. A cough is sometimes required to remove fluid from the lungs. in such cases, the low dose of cough medicine might be reduced.
Antipyeretics: When a person is experiencing discomfort due to fever and pain during the infection, medications to reduce fever and pain, like paracetamol, are prescribed.
Admission into the hospital may be required in severe infections, individual over 65 years of age, or if they have variations in blood pressure, damage to kidney function, rapid breathing, confusion, low/high heart rate and breathing difficulties.
Children may require hospitalization if they are younger than 2 months of age or if they are lethargic, having a high fever and experiencing breathing difficulties. If the child appears dehydrated, it is also a sign to get them hospitalized.
For those who have been infected with pneumonia, getting plenty of rest, staying hydrated and taking medicines as prescribed can help decrease the risk of complications and aid in speedy recovery.
Some practices can help prevent pneumonia and serious illness.

Vaccination: The most common types of pneumonia can be prevented by vaccination. The vaccine available include
Pneumococcal Vaccine: This vaccine protects the individual from serious infections of Streptococcus pneumonia. Two types of pneumococcal vaccine are available. These are the pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine(PPSV23) and pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV 13).
Hemophilus influenza vaccine or Hib vaccine prevents pneumonia due to Hemophilus influenza.
Other relevant vaccines include influenza vaccine, chicken pox vaccine, MMR
Some other preventive measures include:
Thorough and frequent washing of hands
 Covering of the nose while sneezing
Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces like door knobs, handles, keyboards, remotes, mobile phones and other items that are frequently touched by hands.
Avoiding touching face, eyes, nose and mouth without washing hands
Avoiding close contact with those who have cold and cough respiratory infections
Stop smoking
Complications
Among the potential complications are:

Chronic conditions – If you have certain pre-existing medical disorders, pneumonia may exacerbate them. Congestive heart failure and emphysema are two of these disorders. Pneumonia raises the risk of having a heart attack in some people.
Bacteria – Bacteria from a pneumonia infection can enter your bloodstream and cause illness. This can result in dangerously low blood pressure, septic shock, and organ failure in some situations.
Lung abscesses – These are pus-filled cavities in the lungs. They can be treated with antibiotics. To eliminate the pus, patients may require drainage or surgery.
Breathing problems – When you breathe, you can have difficulties receiving enough oxygen. It’s possible that you’ll need to utilize a ventilator.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a condition in which the body’s This is the most serious type of respiratory failure. It’s a medical situation that requires immediate attention.
Pleural effusion – It is a type of pleural effusion that occurs when If you don’t treat your pneumonia, you could develop pleural effusion, which is fluid around your lungs in your pleura. Pleurae are thin membranes that line the inside of your rib cage and the outside of your lungs. If the fluid becomes infectious, it must be evacuated.
Damage to the kidneys, heart, and liver – These organs can be injured if they don’t get enough oxygen or if the immune system reacts too strongly to the infection.
Is pneumonia curable?
Antibiotics should not be stopped too soon if you have a bacterial infection; otherwise, the infection may not resolve completely. This indicates that your pneumonia may recur. Antibiotic resistance can be exacerbated by abruptly stopping antibiotics. Infections that are resistant to antibiotics are more difficult to treat. With at-home treatment, viral pneumonia usually clears up in 1 to 3 weeks. Antivirals may be required in some circumstances. Fungal pneumonia is treated with antifungal medicines. It may require a longer treatment time.

Pneumonia in pregnancy
Maternal pneumonia is pneumonia that develops during pregnancy. Pregnant women are more susceptible to infections like pneumonia. This is related to the immune system’s natural dampening that occurs during pregnancy.

Pneumonia symptoms do not alter by trimester. However, due to other discomforts you may be experiencing, you may notice some of them later in your pregnancy. If you’re expecting a child, call your doctor as soon as you see symptoms of pneumonia. Premature birth and low birth weight are two issues that can arise from maternal pneumonia.

Tuberculosis (TB)

Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease caused by bacteria that most often affects the lungs. It spreads through the air when people with TB cough, sneeze or spit.

Tuberculosis is preventable and curable.

About a quarter of the global population is estimated to have been infected with TB bacteria. In general, people with TB infection don’t feel sick and are not contagious. About 5–10% of people infected with TB will eventually get symptoms and develop TB disease. Babies and children are at higher risk of developing the disease if they are infected.

TB disease is usually treated with antibiotics and can be fatal without treatment.

In certain countries, the Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine is given to babies or small children to prevent TB. The vaccine prevents deaths from TB and protects children from serious forms of TB.

Certain conditions can increase a person’s risk for TB disease:

diabetes (high blood sugar);
weakened immune system (for example, from HIV);
undernutrition;
tobacco use; and
harmful use of alcohol.
Symptoms
In general, people with TB infection don’t feel sick and are not contagious. Only a small proportion of people who get infected with TB will get TB disease and develop symptoms. Babies and children are at higher risk of developing the disease if they are infected.

TB disease occurs when bacteria multiply in the body and affect different organs. TB symptoms may be mild for many months, so it is easy to spread TB to others without knowing it. Symptoms depend on which part of the body is affected. While TB usually affects the lungs, it can also affect the kidneys, brain, and spine.

Some people with TB disease do not have any symptoms but can still spread TB.

Common symptoms of TB are:

prolonged cough (sometimes with blood);
chest pain;
weakness;
fatigue;
weight loss;
fever; and
night sweats
The symptoms people get depend on which part of the body is affected by TB. While TB usually affects the lungs, it can also involve the kidneys, brain, spine and skin.

Prevention
Follow these steps to help prevent tuberculosis infection and spread:

Seek medical attention if you have symptoms like prolonged cough, fever and unexplained weight loss as early treatment for TB can help stop the spread of disease and improve your chances of recovery.
Get screened for TB if you are at increased risk, such as if you have HIV or are in contact with people who have TB in your household or workplace.
TB preventive treatment (or TPT) prevents infection from becoming disease. If prescribed TPT, complete the full course.
If you have TB, practice good hygiene when coughing, including avoiding contact with other people and wearing a mask, covering your mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing, and disposing of sputum and used tissues properly.
Special measures, like respirators and well-ventilated spaces are important to reduce infection in healthcare facilities and other institutions.
Diagnosis
WHO recommends the use of rapid diagnostic tests as the initial diagnostic tests in all persons with signs and symptoms of TB.

Rapid diagnostic tests recommended by WHO include biomarker-based point-of-care tests and molecular assays. All these tests are accurate and can provide initial results to guide treatment decisions within 48 hours of sample collection. Use of these tests will lead to major improvements in the early detection of TB and drug-resistant TB.

Diagnosing drug-resistant forms of TB, including multidrug-resistant TB, as well as HIV-associated TB and pediatric TB can be complex. WHO recommends specific sample types, tests and strategies to detect these forms of TB to increase the chances of detecting disease early and accurately.

A tuberculin skin test (TST), interferon gamma release assay (IGRA) or newer antigen-based skin test (TBST) can be used to identify people with TB infection. The results from these TB infection tests are used to identify which individuals with a high risk of TB will benefit most from TB preventive treatment.

Treatment
Tuberculosis disease is treated with special antibiotics. Treatment is recommended for both TB infection and disease.

The most common antibiotics used are:

rifampicin;
isoniazid;
pyrazinamide; and
ethambutol.
To be effective, medications need to be taken daily for 4–6 months. It is dangerous to stop the medications early or without medical advice as it can prompt TB bacteria in the body to become resistant to the antibiotics.

TB that doesn’t respond to standard drugs is called drug-resistant TB and requires treatment with different medicines.

Multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB)
Drug resistance emerges when TB medicines are used inappropriately, through incorrect prescription by health care providers, poor quality drugs, or patients stopping treatment prematurely.

MDR-TB is a form of TB caused by bacteria that do not respond to rifampicin and isoniazid, the two most effective first-line TB drugs. MDR-TB is treatable and curable by using other drugs, which tend to be more expensive and with more side effects. People exposed to MDR-TB may receive TB preventive treatment with levofloxacin.

In some cases, extensively drug-resistant TB or XDR-TB can develop. TB caused by bacteria that do not respond to the most effective drugs in MDR-TB treatment regimens can leave patients with very limited treatment options.

MDR-TB remains a public health crisis. Only about 2 in 5 people with multidrug-resistant TB accessed treatment in 2024.

In accordance with WHO guidelines, detection of MDR-TB requires bacteriological confirmation of TB and testing for drug resistance using rapid molecular tests or culture methods.

In 2022, new WHO guidelines prioritized a short 6-month all-oral regimen known as BPaLM/BPaL as a treatment of choice for eligible patients. Globally in 2024, approximately 34 000 people with MDR/RR-TB were reported to have started treatment on the 6-month shorter regimens (known as BPaLM and BDLLfxC), a substantial increase from 5653 in 2023 and 1744 in 2022. The shorter duration, lower pill burden and high efficacy of this novel regimen can help ease the burden on health systems and save precious resources to further expand the diagnostic and treatment coverage for all individuals in need. WHO recommends expanded access to all-oral regimens.

TB and HIV
People living with HIV are 12 times more likely to fall ill with TB disease than people without HIV. TB is the leading cause of death among people with HIV.

HIV and TB form a lethal combination, each accelerating the other's progress. In 2024, about 150 000 people died of HIV-associated TB. The percentage of people who fell ill with TB and had a documented HIV test result was 82% in 2024. This was a slight increase from 81% in 2023. The WHO African Region has the highest burden of HIV-associated TB. Globally in 2024, only 61% of the estimated number of people living with HIV who developed TB received antiretroviral therapy (ART).

WHO first recommended collaborative TB/HIV activities to reduce morbidity and mortality from HIV-associated TB in 2004. These activities include bidirectional screening, prevention and treatment of infection and disease. Scale-up of TB treatment and ART since 2005 is estimated to have averted 9.8 million deaths.

Impact
TB mostly affects adults in their most productive years. However, all age groups are at risk. Over 80% of cases and deaths are in low- and middle-income countries.

TB occurs in every part of the world. In 2024, the largest number of new TB cases occurred in the WHO South-East Asia Region (34%), followed by the Western Pacific Region (27%) and the African Region (25%). Around 87% of new TB cases occurred in the 30 high TB burden countries, with two-thirds of the global total in India (25%), Indonesia (10%), the Philippines (6.8%), China (6.5%), Pakistan (6.3%), Nigeria (4.8%), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (3.9%) and Bangladesh (3.6%). The top five countries accounted for 55% of the global total.

Globally, about 50% of people treated for TB and their households face total costs (direct medical expenditures, non-medical expenditures and indirect costs such as income losses) that are catastrophic (>20% of total household income). This is far from the target of the WHO End TB Strategy of zero. Those with compromised immune systems, such as people living with HIV, undernutrition or diabetes, or people who use tobacco have a higher risk of falling ill. Globally in 2024, there were an estimated 0.97 million new TB cases that were attributable to undernutrition, 0.93 million to diabetes, 0.74 million to alcohol use disorders, 0.70 million to smoking and 0.57 million to HIV infection.

Investments to end TB
US$ 22 billion are needed annually for TB prevention, diagnosis, treatment and care to achieve global targets by 2027 agreed on at the 2023 UN high level-TB meeting.

As in the past decade, most of the spending on TB services in 2024 (82%) was from domestic sources. In absolute terms, Brazil, China, India, the Russian Federation and South Africa accounted for US$ 3.1 billion (64%) of the total of US$ 4.8 billion provided from domestic sources in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), international donor funding amounted to US$ 1.1 billion, having ranged from US$ 1.1 billion to US$ 1.2 billion in almost every year since 2015. Financing for TB research and innovation, at US$ 1.2 billion in 2023, also continues to fall far short of the global target of US$ 5 billion per year. Progress to date has been constrained by the overall level of investment.

Influenza (Flu)

What is the flu (influenza)?
The flu is an illness you get from the influenza virus. It causes symptoms like head and body aches, sore throat, fever and respiratory symptoms, which can be severe. Flu is most common in winter months, when many people can get sick at once (an epidemic).

When is flu season?
Flu season — when cases of the flu go up dramatically — in the Northern Hemisphere (which includes the U.S.) is October through May. The highest number of cases (peak) usually happen between December and February.

How common is the flu?
The flu is one of the most common infectious diseases. Every flu season, about 20 to 40 million people in the U.S. catch the flu.

What is the difference between the flu and the common cold?
The flu and the common cold can have similar symptoms, like runny nose and cough. But cold symptoms are usually mild and flu symptoms can be severe and lead to serious complications. Different viruses cause colds and the flu.

How do I know if I have the flu or COVID-19?
Since they have similar symptoms, the only way to know for sure if you have the flu or COVID-19 is to get tested. They both have a risk of serious illness. But different viruses cause these infections, and providers treat them with different medications.

Who is at higher risk for complications from the flu?
Certain health conditions can put you at higher risk for severe illness from the flu. This includes life-threatening complications that require hospitalization. You’re at higher risk for serious illness if you:

Have asthma, COPD or another chronic lung disease.
Have a history of kidney, liver, neurological, heart or blood vessels disease, including stroke.
Have a condition that causes issues with muscle function or makes it difficult to cough, swallow or clear fluids from your airways.
Have diabetes.
Have a weakened immune system (from HIV/AIDS, cancer or immunosuppressive medications).
Have a blood disorder, like sickle cell disease.
Have a BMI greater than 30 (have obesity).
Are under 5 years old or over 65 years old.
Are pregnant.
Are under 19 years old and take aspirin regularly.
Live in a long-term care facility.
Non-Hispanic Black people, non-Hispanic American Indians, Alaska Native people and Hispanic or Latino people have the highest rates of severe illness from the flu compared to non-Hispanic White people and non-Hispanic Asian people.

Symptoms and Causes
Back to video


With so many symptoms in common, it can be hard to tell the difference between a cold and the flu. Here’s how to tell which is which.
What are the symptoms of the flu?
Symptoms of the flu usually come on quickly, and can include:

Fever.
Chills.
Body aches.
Cough.
Headache.
Sore throat.
Runny or stuffy nose (congestion).
Tiredness or feeling run down.
Diarrhea or vomiting (usually only in kids).
You may not have all of these symptoms.

What causes the flu?
The influenza virus causes flu. Influenza A, B and C are the most common types that infect people. Influenza A and B are seasonal (most people get them in the winter) and have more severe symptoms. Influenza C doesn’t cause severe symptoms and it’s not seasonal — the number of cases stays about the same throughout the year.

H1N1 (“swine flu”) and bird flu are both subtypes of influenza A.

Is the flu contagious?
Yes, the flu is contagious (it spreads from person to person). For every person infected, they spread the flu to one to two more people.

How does the flu spread?
The influenza virus spreads from direct or indirect contact with someone else who’s infected. Common ways to get the flu include:

From someone nearby coughing, sneezing or talking. Droplets can either get onto your hands or move through the air to get into your nose or mouth. The flu then moves into your lungs.
By touching a surface that’s contaminated by the flu virus, then touching your face, nose, mouth or eyes. This includes things like door knobs, desks, computers and phones.
By touching the hands or face of someone who has the flu, then touching your face, nose, mouth or eyes.
How long after exposure will I get the flu?
If infected, you’ll usually get symptoms of the flu one to four days after exposure (incubation period).

Diagnosis and Tests
How is the flu diagnosed?
Your provider diagnoses the flu by listening to your symptoms and testing a sample of mucus from your nose. They’ll put a long stick with a soft tip (swab) in your nose to test for influenza. Results may take a few minutes or your provider may send the sample to a lab, where you’ll get results in a day or two.

Management and Treatment
How is the flu treated?
Providers can treat the flu with antiviral medications under certain circumstances. Antivirals can reduce your risk of severe illness and shorten the amount of time you’re sick. Many people can treat the flu without prescription medications. Providers prescribe antivirals if you:

Have had symptoms for under 48 hours. Antivirals are less likely to work if you start them after two days of symptoms. The virus has already made more copies of itself and your body has started to fight it off with its own antibodies.
Have an underlying condition or are at risk for severe illness. Providers may prescribe antivirals even if you’ve had symptoms for longer than 48 hours.
Have severe symptoms, even if you’ve been sick for longer than 48 hours.
Live with or care for people who are at risk for severe complications of the flu.
What medications treat the flu?
Antiviral drugs for influenza include:

Oseltamivir phosphate (Tamiflu®). You take oseltamivir by mouth as a pill or a liquid. You usually take it for several days.
Zanamivir (Relenza®). You breathe zanamivir in through your mouth with an inhaler. You usually have to take it for several days. Zanamivir isn’t recommended for people with breathing issues, like asthma or COPD.
Peramivir (Rapivap®). Your provider gives you peramivir directly into your veins using an IV. You usually only need one dose of peramivir.
Baloxavir marboxil (Xofluza®). You take baloxavir marboxil by mouth as a pill or a liquid. You only take one dose. Baloxavir isn’t recommended if you’re pregnant, breastfeeding, hospitalized or have certain medical conditions.
Tell your provider about any health conditions you have before starting an antiviral medication.

Side effects of treatment
Each antiviral medication has different side effects, but common ones include nausea and diarrhea. Inhaled medications can cause spasms that tighten and narrow your airways (bronchospasm).

How do I manage symptoms of the flu?
Many people can manage the symptoms of flu at home with over-the-counter (OTC) medications and other therapies, including:

Getting plenty of rest.
Drinking fluids like water or broth to help prevent dehydration.
Applying heat packs or hot water bottles can help with aching muscles.
Taking acetaminophen (Tylenol®) or NSAIDs (Advil®, Motrin®, Aleve®) can help lower your fever and relieve head and body aches.
Using spray or oral decongestants like phenylephrine or pseudoephedrine can help with a runny or stuffy nose.
Taking cough suppressants (antitussives) like dextromethorphan can help calm a nagging cough.
Using expectorants like guaifenesin make it easier to clear mucus out of your lungs.
Not everyone should take certain OTCs, so check with your provider before you use them. It’s also a good idea to make sure certain medications are okay to use together or with supplements. Don’t give aspirin to children under the age of 16 unless their provider says it’s okay.

Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have the flu?
Most people are able to manage flu symptoms at home and recover within a few days to a week. Because it can cause severe illness, it’s important to keep an eye on your symptoms and get medical attention if you need it. This is especially important if you have an underlying health condition.

If you’re sick with the flu, you should avoid being around others, except to seek medical care.

How long does the flu last?
Flu can last from a few days to two weeks. Symptoms like fever and body aches can come on suddenly but usually go away faster than other symptoms. A cough or runny nose can last longer.

How long is the flu contagious?
You can be contagious with the flu from a day before your symptoms start to up to a week after. You’re most contagious for three to four days after your symptoms start. People with weakened immune systems and infants may be contagious for longer.

When can I go back to work/school?
To avoid spreading the flu to others, you shouldn’t go back to work or school until it’s been at least 24 hours since you’ve had a fever (without taking fever-reducing medications). Your employer or school may have different requirements for returning.

Complications
The flu virus itself can cause complications or it can weaken your immune system and allow bacteria to infect different parts of your body (secondary infection). Complications and secondary infections include:

Ear infections.
Sinus infections.
Severe lung infection (pneumonia). Pneumonia can lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and other life-threatening conditions.
Pregnancy loss (miscarriage).
Neural tube defects (NTDs) in the developing fetus of a pregnant woman.
How many people die from the flu each year?
In a typical flu season in the U.S., it’s estimated that between 20,000 and 50,000 people die from the flu. Another 300,000 to 500,000 require hospitalization for serious illness.

Prevention
How can I prevent the flu?
The best way to reduce your risk is to get the flu vaccine yearly. You can get it as a shot or a mist sprayed into your nose. The influenza virus can change (mutate) over time, so you need to get vaccinated every year.

Other ways to reduce your risk of getting the flu include:

Wash your hands often with soap and water. If you can’t use soap and water, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer.
Cover your nose and mouth when you sneeze or cough. Cough or sneeze into your elbow or a tissue rather than your bare hand.
Avoid being around other people when you or they are sick with the flu or other infectious diseases.
Consider wearing a mask if you’re sick and can’t avoid being around others.
Avoid touching your face, eyes, nose and mouth.
Don’t share food or eating utensils (forks, spoons, cups) with others.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you think you have the flu, it’s important to get tested early on so that antiviral medications are most effective if your provider prescribes them. Contact a healthcare provider right away if:

You have flu symptoms and an underlying condition that puts you at higher risk for severe illness.
Your symptoms don’t start to improve after seven to 10 days or if you have a fever lasting longer than three days.
You’re pregnant and have a fever or other flu symptoms.
When should I go to ER?
Go to the ER or seek immediate medical attention if you have symptoms of severe illness, including:

High fever (over 103 F/40 C).
Difficulty breathing.
Not peeing or peeing very little.
Pain in your chest or stomach (abdomen) that doesn’t go away.
Persistent dizziness.
Confusion.
Severe muscle pain or weakness.
Seizures.
Bluish skin, lips or nails (cyanosis, which can be a sign of low oxygen levels in your blood or tissues).
Fever or cough that gets better or goes away but then get worse.
Worsening of other health conditions.

 common cold

What is the common cold?
A cold is a contagious upper respiratory infection that affects your nose, throat, sinuses and windpipe (trachea). You may have heard that the common cold is a coronavirus. In fact, more than 200 different types of viruses can cause a cold. The most common cold virus is the rhinovirus.

We call colds “common” because as their name implies, they’re widespread. You’ll probably have more colds in your lifetime than any other illness. Adults catch two to three colds a year, while young children come down with a cold four or more times a year.

Symptoms and Causes
The first sign of the common cold is often a sore throat. Other early symptoms may include runny nose, sneezing and coughing.
Early symptoms of the common cold include sore throat, runny nose and coughing.
What are the symptoms of the common cold?
Common cold symptoms typically appear in stages. The common cold stages include early, active and late.

Stage 1: Early (Days 1 to 3)
Within one to three days of picking up a cold virus, you may notice a tickle in your throat. About half of all people with colds report a tickly or sore throat as their first symptom. Other common cold symptoms you may experience during this early stage include:

Sneezing.
Runny nose.
Stuffy nose (nasal congestion).
Cough.
Hoarseness.
Stage 2: Active (Days 4 to 7)
Symptoms typically worsen or peak during this stage. In addition to the symptoms in stage 1, you may experience:

Body aches.
Headache.
Runny eyes and nose.
Fatigue.
Fever (more common in children).
Stage 3: Late (Days 8 to 10)
Colds usually begin to wind down during this stage. You may be free and clear at this point. But some symptoms can persist. Some people develop a nagging cough that can last up to two months after a respiratory infection.

If your symptoms get worse and/or your fever returns, make a trip to a healthcare provider. You may have developed another infection or a complication, such as bronchitis, sinusitis or pneumonia.

What are the symptoms of the common cold in babies?
Symptoms of colds in babies may include:

Runny nose (the discharge may start clear; later, it becomes thicker and may be gray, yellow or green).
Sneezing.
Fever of 101 to 102 degrees Fahrenheit (38.3 to 38.9 degrees Celsius).
Loss of appetite.
Increased drooling because of sore throat and difficulty swallowing.
Cough.
Irritability.
Slightly swollen glands.
How do cold symptoms differ from more severe infections in babies and children?
If your child has any of the following symptoms, call their healthcare provider. These symptoms could mean that your child has something more serious than a cold:

Fever in an infant 2 months or younger.
Difficulty breathing (especially if your baby’s or child’s nostrils widen with each breath).
Fast or labored breathing.
Wheezing.
Ribs showing with each breath.
Blue lips.
Not eating or drinking, which could mean dehydration.
Ear pain.
Excessive crankiness or sleepiness.
A cough that lasts more than 3 weeks.
Your baby seems to be getting sicker.
What causes the common cold?
Rhinoviruses cause up to 50% of common colds. There are more than 100 different rhinoviruses. But other types of viruses, such as coronaviruses, can also cause colds. More than 200 different viruses can cause a cold.

Is the common cold contagious?
Yes. Colds spread easily from person to person. For you to become infected, the virus has to get to one of your mucous membranes — the moist lining of your nostrils, eyes or mouth. That happens when you touch a surface or breathe moist air that contains the cold virus.

For example, when a person who’s sick sneezes or coughs, they launch droplets of fluid containing the cold virus into the air. If you breathe in those droplets, the cold virus takes root in your nose. You can also leave virus particles on surfaces you touch when you’re sick. If someone else touches those surfaces and then touches their nostrils, eyes or mouth, the virus can get in.

How long is the common cold contagious?
You can be contagious for up to two weeks, even spreading a cold a day or two before you have symptoms. But you’re most contagious when your symptoms are at their worst — usually the first three days you feel sick.

What is the common cold incubation period?
The incubation period is the time between when you’re infected and when your symptoms first appear. The common cold incubation period is between 12 hours and three days after exposure to the virus.

Why do children and babies get more colds?
The common cold in children and babies occurs more often because they haven’t been exposed to as many viruses as adults. Their immune systems have to learn how to recognize and fight new germs.

Before turning 2 years old, a baby can get as many as eight to 10 colds a year. By the time you become an adult, you’ve had many colds. It’s easier for your immune system to identify and attack similar viruses.

In addition, children are in close contact with other children. Kids typically don’t cover their coughs and sneezes or wash their hands before touching their faces — steps that prevent the virus from spreading.

Cold viruses can live on objects for several hours. Babies often pick up objects that other babies have touched. If a baby touches something that has cold germs on it, then touches their mouth, eyes or nose, the germs can infect them.

Diagnosis and Tests
How is the common cold diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will ask you about your symptoms and perform a physical exam. During the exam, the provider will check for signs, such as:

Swelling in your nostrils.
A stuffy nose.
A red, irritated throat.
Swollen lymph nodes in your neck.
Clear lungs.
What tests will be done to diagnose the common cold?
Typically, a physical exam is enough to determine if you have a cold. You may need tests if the provider suspects you have COVID-19, the flu or another condition. The provider may give you a nasal swab test (cotton swab rubbed inside your nose) to check for these viruses. Chest X-rays can rule out other conditions, such as bronchitis or pneumonia.

Management and Treatment
How is the common cold treated?
There’s no cure for a cold. You have to let it run its course. Most colds go away on their own within seven to 10 days and don’t turn into anything more serious. Common cold treatment includes over-the-counter (OTC) medications to help reduce your symptoms and keep you comfortable until you recover.

Why can’t antibiotics cure a cold?
Antibiotics are medications that fight infections caused by bacteria. Because viruses cause colds, antibiotics don’t work for colds. Sometimes, children may develop complications from bacteria, such as an ear infection or pneumonia. Healthcare providers may prescribe antibiotics to treat these illnesses.

What cold medicines relieve symptoms?
There are many OTC common cold medication options available to treat your symptoms. But some of these medications aren’t safe for children. Check with a healthcare provider before giving your child OTC medications. Be careful not to combine medicines that treat multiple symptoms. You could get too much of some ingredients, which could cause other health problems, including organ damage.

Medications that may relieve cold symptoms include:

Pain relievers: Acetaminophen (Tylenol®) and NSAIDs such as ibuprofen (Advil®) may relieve headaches and fever.
Decongestants: You can use medications like pseudoephedrine (Contac Cold 12 Hour® and Sudafed®).
Antihistamines: Diphenhydramine (Benadryl®) and other antihistamines may stop sneezing and a runny nose.
Cough suppressants: Medications such as dextromethorphan (Robitussin® and Vicks DayQuil Cough®) and codeine can help reduce coughing. Providers don’t routinely recommend these for children under 5 years of age.
Expectorants: Guaifenesin (Mucinex®) and other expectorants may help thin and loosen mucus.
How are common colds in babies treated?
Unless prescribed by their provider, don’t give your baby any over-the-counter cough or cold medicines. To treat common cold in babies:

Keep your baby comfortable.
Give your baby fluids. For babies 6 months or younger, let them drink breast milk or formula. At 6 months, your baby can also have some water.
Let your baby get plenty of rest.
Since most children can’t blow their nose until about age 4, the following methods may help ease your baby’s stuffy nose:

Saline and suction: About 15 minutes before a feeding, use over-the-counter saline (salt water) drops to loosen up the mucus in your baby’s nostrils. Suction out the liquid and mucus a few minutes later with a rubber bulb or oral suction device. This will clear the mucus out of your baby’s nose and allow them to breathe and suck at the same time.
Petroleum jelly: Dab petroleum jelly on the outside of your baby’s nostrils to reduce irritation. Don’t block the inside of your baby’s nostrils. (Unless their provider recommends it, don’t use nasal sprays on your baby. They may work for a bit but will make their congestion worse with continued use.)
Humidifier or vaporizer: Moisten the air in your baby’s room with a humidifier or vaporizer. The clean, cool mist will help moisten the air and decrease the drying of your baby’s nasal passages and throat. Clean and dry the humidifier thoroughly before using it to get rid of bacteria or mold that may have collected in the device. Ensure you have the appropriate filter, and check if it needs to be replaced. Don’t use hot water vaporizers because of the risk of burns.
Steam: If you don’t have a humidifier, take your baby into a steamy room such as a bathroom. Turn on the hot water, close the door and sit together in the steamy room for about 15 minutes. Don’t leave your baby alone in the room. Be safe around water. Giving your baby a warm bath may also work.
Babies can continue their normal activities if they seem well enough to do so. If they have a fever or complications, it’s best to keep them at home.

Outlook / Prognosis
How long does a common cold last?
Most colds go away on their own within seven to 10 days. Most people recover quickly and the common cold doesn’t lead to anything more serious.

Can a cold kill you?
The common cold isn’t fatal. In some people — especially those with weakened immune systems — a cold could lead to other conditions that could cause severe health problems. Those complications include:

Asthma.
Sinus infections.
Ear infections.
Prevention
Can the common cold be prevented?
There are several steps you can take to prevent a cold, including:

Washing your hands: Wash your hands frequently, especially before eating or preparing food. Also, wash your hands after using the bathroom, wiping your nose or coming into contact with someone who has a cold.
Avoiding touching your face: Cold viruses spread from your hands to your eyes, nose and mouth.
Cleaning frequently used surfaces: Viruses can live on doorknobs and other places people often touch.
Using hand sanitizers: When you can’t wash your hands with soap and water, use alcohol-based hand sanitizer.
Strengthening your immune system: Get enough sleep, eat a healthy diet and exercise so your body is ready to fight off germs.
Staying home: To make sure you don’t spread the cold to others, stay home when you’re sick.
How can colds in babies be prevented?
The best way to prevent your baby from catching a cold is to keep them away from people who have colds. If possible, keep your baby home. A virus that causes a mild illness in an older child or an adult can cause a more serious one in an infant.

Hand washing is the most important way to reduce the spread of colds:

Adults who have contact with babies and young children should wash their hands after coughing, sneezing or wiping their nose.
Wash your hands after touching someone who has a cold.
After wiping your baby’s nose, wash your hands and your baby’s hands.
Clean toys regularly and avoid sharing toys that babies place in their mouths.
If soap and water aren’t available, use pre-moistened hand wipes or hand sanitizers. (Be sure to keep hand sanitizers away from children. They may be harmful if swallowed.)
Keep your baby up-to-date on all of the recommended immunizations. They won’t stop colds, but they can help prevent some complications, such as bacterial infections of their ears or lungs.

Pediatricians recommend the flu (influenza) vaccine each year for babies who are at least 6 months old. The shot protects against the flu but not against other respiratory viruses. The COVID-19 immunization is available as well for infants starting at 6 months of age.

Living With
What are the best common cold remedies?
You may have heard that supplements and herbal remedies, such as zinc, vitamin C and echinacea can treat and prevent colds.

Researchers haven’t found that any of those remedies can prevent colds. But zinc may shorten the illness and reduce symptoms. However, it may cause permanent loss of smell, especially when you use it in nasal sprays.

The best common cold self-care remedy is to get plenty of rest. Consider taking time off from work or school for at least the first few days of illness. Not only will you have more time to rest, but you’ll avoid spreading germs to others.

Also, make sure you’re drinking plenty of fluids to keep your nose and throat moist. Avoid alcohol and caffeine because they have a drying effect.

When should I see a healthcare provider for the common cold?
Contact a healthcare provider if you have any of the following symptoms:

High fever.
Chest pain.
Ear pain.
Asthma flare-up or difficulty breathing.
Symptoms lasting more than 10 days or getting worse.
When should my baby see their provider for the common cold?
Call your baby’s healthcare provider or go to the nearest emergency room if your baby:

Develops a high fever.
Stops eating.
Is vomiting.
Has ear or stomach pain.
Cries more than usual.
Is sleepier than usual.
Starts wheezing.
Has trouble breathing.

Hepatitis (A, B, C)

What is viral hepatitis?
Viral hepatitis is a viral infection that affects millions of people worldwide. It causes inflammation in your liver. Viral hepatitis can be acute (short-term) and cause symptoms that last from a few weeks to a few months. But you can have a form of chronic (long-term) viral hepatitis that doesn’t go away.

You get the infection after exposure to hepatitis viruses. These viruses are different but have some symptoms in common. Viral hepatitis may not cause symptoms right away. You can have and spread the condition without knowing you’re sick.

Contact with infected blood or bodily fluids is the main way these viruses spread. Without treatment, the viruses can lead to life-threatening liver disease. There are vaccines that help prevent some types of viral hepatitis.

There are five known types of viral hepatitis. The most common types are hepatitis A, hepatitis B and hepatitis C:

Hepatitis A. The hepatitis A virus (HAV) causes this infection. You can get hepatitis A from eating contaminated food or water that contains the virus.
Hepatitis B. This type of hepatitis is the most common liver infection in the world. The hepatitis B virus (HBV) often causes short-term illness. But it can become chronic.
Hepatitis C. This virus often spreads when people who have it share needles and syringes. This virus is more likely to become chronic.
Hepatitis D. People who have hepatitis B may get hepatitis D. The hepatitis D virus (HDV) needs HBV to survive and spread.
Hepatitis E. The hepatitis E virus (HEV) typically goes away without treatment. But you’ll need treatment if you’re pregnant. Hepatitis E in pregnancy can cause pregnancy complications or liver failure.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of viral hepatitis
Common symptoms of the different types of viral hepatitis include:

Aching joints
Dark-colored pee
Fatigue
Feeling sick to your stomach
Fever
Loss of appetite
Pale or clay-colored poop
Skin or white of your eyes looks yellow (jaundice)
Stomach pain
Viral hepatitis symptoms develop over time as the condition progresses. Healthcare providers consider your symptoms and other factors to stage viral hepatitis.

Acute viral hepatitis stages
All types of hepatitis can be acute (short-term) illnesses that go away. Acute viral hepatitis goes through four general stages:

Incubation. You have a type of viral hepatitis, but you don’t have symptoms. Hepatitis A, B, C and D are contagious. That means you can pass the virus on to other people even though you don’t feel sick. The incubation period varies. On average, incubation lasts between two weeks and three months.
Prodromal. You have general symptoms like fatigue, loss of appetite, or nausea and vomiting. This stage or phase typically lasts three to 10 days.
Icteric. You may notice your pee is darker than usual. Your skin and the whites of your eyes turn yellow. These are jaundice symptoms. This stage lasts one to two weeks.
Recovery. Your jaundice symptoms get better as your body overcomes the virus. The recovery stage can last two to four weeks.
Chronic viral hepatitis stages
Healthcare providers use different standards to set chronic viral hepatitis stages:

Hepatitis B. There are four stages of hepatitis B. Providers base stages on how your immune system reacts to the virus.
Hepatitis C. Chronic hepatitis C has five stages that cause fibrosis (scar tissue).
Hepatitis D. You get hepatitis D along with hepatitis B. The viruses take turns duplicating in your body. Hepatitis D has three stages based on the virus’s activity.
Viral hepatitis causes
Viral hepatitis happens when you have exposure to any of the viruses that cause it. That can happen if you have contact with bodily fluids like blood and pee from someone who has the virus.

The most common cause for hepatitis A is food poisoning. That can happen if you eat food or drink water that contains traces of contaminated poop. You can also get it from sharing needles or having unprotected sex with someone who has the virus.
Hepatitis B can spread through unprotected sex, sharing needles or syringes, or during childbirth, when it can pass to the newborn.
The most common way to get hepatitis C in the U.S. is sharing needles and syringes to inject intravenous drugs. You’re also at risk when getting a tattoo or body piercing with unsterile equipment.
You can get hepatitis D if you already have hepatitis B or have exposure to both viruses at the same time. Hepatitis D spreads through unprotected sex and sharing of needles.
Hepatitis E isn’t contagious. You may have exposure to the virus by drinking water that contains traces of poop from someone with the virus, eating undercooked meat or being born to someone who has the virus.
Complications
Viral hepatitis can lead to more serious issues like:

Becoming a chronic disease
Cirrhosis
Liver failure
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose viral hepatitis
A healthcare provider will do a physical examination. They’ll ask about your symptoms. They may do blood tests to check for signs of specific viruses. They may also do liver function tests.

Management and Treatment
How is viral hepatitis treated?
Treatment varies depending on factors like the type of virus you have and your symptoms. There are treatments to manage viral hepatitis symptoms. A healthcare provider may prescribe an antiviral medication if you have hepatitis B and hepatitis C.

Treatments that manage symptoms include:

IV fluids
IV nutrition
Pain medication
Hepatitis C is the only viral hepatitis for which there’s a cure.

Recovery time
Viral hepatitis can cause acute (short-term) illness that goes away very quickly. But sometimes, it can take months for your liver to heal from the damage that hepatitis does. And some chronic forms of viral hepatitis never go away. Talk to your healthcare provider about recovery time in your situation.

When should I seek care?
You should seek care if you:

Know you’ve had close contact with someone who has viral hepatitis
Have symptoms that you think may mean you have viral hepatitis
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have viral hepatitis?
That depends on your situation. For example, your body can fight off hepatitis A and hepatitis E infections without medication. Medication can cure hepatitis C. But hepatitis B and hepatitis D are chronic diseases. You may need medication to keep them from getting worse.

What can I do to feel better?
There are many things you can do as you recover:

Avoid beverages that contain alcohol. Alcohol puts stress on your liver.
Eat well by choosing food that gives your liver the nutrients it needs.
Get extra rest so your body has energy to fight off or cope with viral hepatitis.
Prevention
Can viral hepatitis be prevented?
There are vaccines that prevent viral hepatitis A and B. You can reduce your risk of developing other types of viral hepatitis if you:

Use a condom during sex
Don’t share needles to take drugs
Practice good personal hygiene, like thorough handwashing with soap and water
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Viral hepatitis is a common condition that can have life-threatening consequences. You can prevent some viral hepatitis infections by receiving vaccinations. 
There aren’t vaccines for all types of viral hepatitis. But there are ways to reduce the risk you’ll get those viruses. Start by understanding how the viruses spread. 
Then, take steps to avoid activities that put you at risk. You may not be able to avoid some situations. Talk to a healthcare provider if there’s a chance you have viral hepatitis. 
They’ll recommend treatment that’s right for your situation.

Gastroenteritis (Stomach Flu)

Gastroenteritis means inflammation in your stomach and intestine. Inflammation makes these organs feel swollen and sore. It causes symptoms of illness, like nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and diarrhea.

Gastroenteritis often happens when you get an infection in your gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Bacteria and viruses can cause food poisoning and stomach flu infections. Chemicals can also cause gastroenteritis.

Types of gastroenteritis
Infectious gastroenteritis is the most common type. It’s caused by an infection in your gastrointestinal tract (your stomach and/or intestines). Viruses, bacteria, fungi or parasites may cause the infection.

Chemical gastroenteritis can happen if you ingest toxic chemicals, which can contaminate food and water sources. You can also get it from heavy doses of alcohol or drugs, including some medications.

How common is this condition?
Just about everyone gets gastroenteritis, likely more than once. Most of the time, it’s not serious. But in more vulnerable populations, it can be. Around the world, gastroenteritis is a leading cause of death.

Symptoms and Causes
Common symptoms of gastroenteritis include diarrhea, nausea and vomiting.
Gastroenteritis affects your stomach and intestines, causing symptoms like nausea, vomiting and diarrhea.
What are the signs and symptoms of gastroenteritis?
Symptoms involving your intestines (diarrhea, cramps), together with symptoms involving your stomach (nausea, vomiting) are the hallmarks of gastroenteritis. You’ll know it if it’s “coming out both ends.”

Gastroenteritis symptoms may include:

Diarrhea.
Nausea and vomiting.
Loss of appetite.
Abdominal pain and cramping.
Fever.
Chills.
Fatigue.
Body aches.
What are the first signs of gastroenteritis?
Gastroenteritis symptoms often come on suddenly. Gastrointestinal symptoms appear first. You might have diarrhea, stomach pain or cramps, nausea and/or vomiting many times in a short period.

As the day goes on, you may or may not begin to experience what are called “systemic symptoms” — symptoms that affect the rest of your body. These may include fever, chills and body aches.

How long does gastroenteritis last?
The most common types of gastroenteritis only last a day or two. Your body can overcome most bacterial and viral infections on its own. Some types may last longer or need treatment to go away.

What is the main cause of gastroenteritis?
Gastroenteritis happens when your immune system activates to defend your stomach and intestines from harm. It sends inflammatory cells to help fight infections and repair injured tissues.

This is usually a temporary (acute) response to a temporary threat or injury. It takes a short time to work, and then, the inflammation goes away. Longer-lasting (persistent) gastroenteritis is unusual.

What are the specific causes of acute gastroenteritis?
Infectious diseases or toxic chemicals can trigger acute gastroenteritis.

Infectious diseases
Infectious gastroenteritis is caused by an infection in your gastrointestinal tract, like a:

Viral infection.
Bacterial infection.
Parasitic infection.
Fungal infection.
Infections are the most common cause of acute gastroenteritis.

Viral gastroenteritis
Viral infections cause viral gastroenteritis, which is the most common type overall. Viruses cause 60% of all gastroenteritis cases. Norovirus alone accounts for 50% of all viral gastroenteritis cases.

Viral gastroenteritis sometimes goes by the nickname, “stomach flu,” although this isn’t a medical term. Influenza (flu) viruses don’t cause viral gastroenteritis. Viruses that can cause “stomach flu” include:

Norovirus.
Rotavirus.
Astrovirus.
Adenovirus.
Calicivirus.
Sapovirus.
Bacterial gastroenteritis
Bacterial infections cause bacterial gastroenteritis. Common bacterial gastrointestinal infections include:

Campylobacter.
Clostridioides difficile (C. diff).
Escherichia coli (E. coli).
Salmonella.
Shigella.
Staphylococci (Staph).
Parasitic gastroenteritis
Parasite infections cause parasitic gastroenteritis. Common parasite infections include:

Giardiasis.
Cryptosporidiosis.
Cyclosporiasis.
Amebiasis (amoebic dysentery).
Fungal gastroenteritis
Fungal infections can cause fungal gastroenteritis. The most common fungal infections are:

Candidiasis.
Aspergillosis.
Chemical gastroenteritis
Chemicals can injure and inflame the lining of your stomach and intestines. Some chemicals do this even in small amounts. Others, like alcohol and certain medications, can cause gastroenteritis in larger doses.

Causes of chemical gastroenteritis include:

Heavy metal poisoning.
Plant toxins, like poisonous mushrooms.
Cocaine.
Chemotherapy drugs.
Alcohol overuse.
NSAIDs overuse.
Colchicine overuse.
Digoxin overuse.
Is gastroenteritis contagious?
Infectious gastroenteritis is contagious. When you have an infection in your gastrointestinal system, it infects your poop. Infections can spread from your poop to anyone who comes into contact with it.

Microscopic traces of poop can linger on bathroom surfaces, diaper changing areas and people’s hands if they don’t wash well. These traces can transfer to others who touch them, or to their food or water.

Chemical gastroenteritis isn’t contagious. But it can affect many people in one place at one time. If you get toxic poisoning from food, water or your environment, others sharing those things may also get it.

How do you catch gastroenteritis infections?
The most common way to get a gastrointestinal infection is from contaminated food or water. You can also catch it by touching an infected person, or by touching a surface that an infected person touched.

How long is gastroenteritis contagious?
Gastrointestinal infections are most contagious during the period when you have symptoms, and for two days after. These last two days are when your body is shedding the infection through your poop.

What are the risk factors for getting gastroenteritis?
Just about everyone gets gastroenteritis. But you’re more likely to get it more frequently if you:

Are older than 65 or younger than 6.
Live or work in a childcare or nursing home.
Eat raw fish or meat.
Travel abroad, especially in less developed regions.
Have a chronic condition that weakens your immune system.
Use certain drugs or alcohol frequently.
What are the possible complications of acute gastroenteritis?
Most of the time, gastroenteritis is brief and ends by itself. When this is the case, the primary complication to look out for is dehydration. This is more of a risk for children and senior citizens.

When you’re having frequent diarrhea or vomiting, you’re losing a lot of fluids and electrolytes. If you can't replace them fast enough, you could become dehydrated and develop electrolyte imbalances.

If gastroenteritis lasts a long time, it could begin to damage your stomach and intestines. For example, you might develop ulcers in your organs that bleed. Only a few types of gastroenteritis can last longer.

Some specific causes of gastroenteritis can have their own side effects. These are separate from the effects of gastroenteritis itself. Certain infections or toxins can do more lasting damage to your body.

People with weakened immune systems and people with less access to clean water, nutrition, sanitation and healthcare are more vulnerable to gastroenteritis. They might get it more often, and for longer.

Children in less developed countries and senior citizens in long-term care facilities are more at risk of serious complications from gastroenteritis. This is because their health status is lower to begin with.

Diagnosis and Tests
How is gastroenteritis diagnosed?
Healthcare providers can usually recognize gastroenteritis by your symptoms. They’ll ask you when your symptoms started and what was going on at the time that could have triggered them.

If you have unusual symptoms, or if they want to investigate your symptoms further, they may order some tests. A poop test or blood test can help prove gastroenteritis and rule out other conditions.

Management and Treatment
What is the best way to get rid of gastroenteritis?
In most cases, gastroenteritis goes away by itself. The best way to help your body recover is to give it lots of rest and fluids. You might want to stick with bland, easy-to-digest foods for a few days.

But certain, less common causes of gastroenteritis do need treatment. If your symptoms don’t seem to be going away, or you believe you have a type of toxic poisoning, tell a healthcare provider.

What is the medical treatment for gastroenteritis?
Most of the time, medical treatment for gastroenteritis is supportive. That means the treatment supports your body’s natural healing process rather than curing gastroenteritis. It might include:

IV fluids to prevent or correct dehydration and electrolyte imbalances.
Parenteral nutrition to give your body energy without using your stressed digestive system.
Medications to treat symptoms like nausea and diarrhea, in certain cases.
But some causes of acute gastroenteritis may need medication to go away. For example, you may need a specific antibiotic or antiparasitic medication to treat a specific type of bacterial or parasite infection.

If you have chemical gastroenteritis due to toxic poisoning, you may need additional treatment to help clear the toxin out of your body. The treatment will depend on the toxin and on your condition.

How soon will I feel better?
You should feel better within two to three days after your symptoms first started, or after you started medication if you needed it. If you aren't feeling better yet, let your healthcare provider know.

Outlook / Prognosis
How serious is gastroenteritis?
For most people, gastroenteritis isn’t serious. But for people with weaker immune systems, it can be. This includes children under 5, adults over 65 and anyone with a lower health status in general.

If you know that you or someone in your care has a weaker immune system, take special care to avoid dehydration and exhaustion from gastroenteritis. Seek healthcare if symptoms don’t improve soon.

Prevention
Can gastroenteritis be prevented?
Not every case of gastroenteritis is preventable. But there’s a lot we can do to reduce our personal risk and prevent common gastrointestinal infections from spreading in our communities. For example:

Good handwashing. Good handwashing is one of the most important and easiest ways to protect yourself and others from infections. Lathering with soap for at least 20 seconds removes germs and toxins from your hands that might transfer to your mouth or to other people.
Good cleaning. Diligent cleaning is especially important in community places like schools, daycares, nursing homes and hospitals, where many people use the same facilities every day. Cleaning with disinfectants can help remove germs that may linger on common surfaces.
Safe food handling. Food can become contaminated at any stage of production, from harvesting and storage to cooking and preparation. Remember to wash your hands before and after handling food. Wash, refrigerate, freeze, cook and serve food according to food safety guidelines.
Safe travels. It’s especially easy to get food poisoning while traveling abroad. (This is called traveler’s diarrhea.) You may be exposed to microorganisms there that you wouldn’t meet at home. When traveling, it’s best to stick to cooked, peeled or packaged foods and bottled water.
Safe substance use. Only use drugs as directed. If you feel like your medications aren’t doing enough as directed, or you’re self-medicating with substances, see a healthcare provider for a better long-term treatment plan. If you have a substance use disorder, treatment can help.
Living With
What foods should I eat or avoid while living with gastroenteritis?
You may not have much appetite with gastroenteritis, and that’s natural. Your irritated stomach and intestines won’t be able to digest or absorb many of the foods that you would normally eat anyway.

It’s OK to eat a very limited diet for a few days until the inflammation goes down. Just focus on bland foods that are easy to digest and avoid foods that might make your gastrointestinal symptoms worse.

What to eat (and drink):
Crackers.
Soup broths.
Bananas.
Toast.
Rice or porridge.
Applesauce.
Watermelon.
Popsicles.
Ice chips.
Sports drinks or hydration formulas.
Foods (and drinks) to avoid:
Caffeinated beverages.
Artificial sweeteners.
Dairy products.
Alcohol.
Red meat.
Spicy foods.
Sharp foods, like chips.
Seeds and nuts.
Rich or fatty foods.
Sweets.
When should I seek medical care for gastroenteritis?
Contact a healthcare provider if you notice any unusual or red flag symptoms, such as:

Inability to keep fluids down, signs of dehydration.
Symptoms last longer than five days.
Fever lasts more than three days or is higher than 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius).
Severe abdominal pain or a rigid, distended abdomen.
Abnormal heartbeat or abnormal breathing.
Blood in your poop.
Green vomit.
Altered mental status.

Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)

What is irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)?
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a group of symptoms that affect your digestive system. It’s a common but uncomfortable gastrointestinal disease, or condition that affects your intestines.

People with IBS experience symptoms that include abdominal pain and cramps. With IBS, you may also have frequent diarrhea, constipation or both. IBS doesn’t cause tissue damage in your GI (gastrointestinal) tract or increase your risk of more serious conditions, like colon cancer. Instead, it’s a chronic (long-term) condition that most people can manage by changing their routines and what they eat, taking medications and receiving behavioral therapy.

What are the types of IBS?
Researchers categorize IBS based on how your stools (poop) look on the days when you’re having symptom flare-ups. Most people with IBS have normal bowel movements on some days and abnormal ones on others. The abnormal days define the kind of IBS you have.

IBS with constipation (IBS-C): Most of your poop is hard and lumpy.
IBS with diarrhea (IBS-D): Most of your poop is loose and watery.
IBS with mixed bowel habits (IBS-M): You have both hard and lumpy bowel movements and loose and watery movements.
The differences are important. Certain treatments only work for specific types of IBS.

How common is IBS?
It’s very common. Experts estimate that about 10% to 15% of adults in the United States have IBS. Only about 5% to 7% see a provider and receive a diagnosis.

It’s the most common disease that gastroenterologists (experts in GI diseases) diagnose.

Symptoms and Causes
Signs and symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome
Irritable bowel syndrome can change your bathroom habits and cause pain in your gut.
What are the symptoms of IBS?
Symptoms of IBS can appear frequently. Or, they may occur during flare-ups. In other words, you don’t always experience symptoms. Instead, symptoms may go away (and you’ll have normal bowel movements). At other times, symptoms return.

Signs and symptoms of IBS include:

Abdominal pain or cramps, usually related to the urge to poop.
Excess gas and bloating.
Diarrhea, constipation or alternating between the two.
Mucus in your poop (may look whitish).
Feeling like you’re unable to empty your bowels after pooping.
What causes IBS?
Researchers don’t know exactly what causes IBS, but they classify it as a neurogastrointestinal (GI) disorder. These conditions, also called disorders of the gut-brain interaction, have to do with problems with how your gut and brain coordinate to help your digestive system work.

Communication challenges between your brain and gut can cause:

Dysmotility: You may have problems with how your GI muscles contract and move food through your GI tract. The colon (large intestine) muscle tends to contract more in people with IBS. These contractions cause cramps and pain.
Visceral hypersensitivity: You may have extra-sensitive nerves in your GI tract. People with IBS tend to have a lower pain tolerance than people without it. Your digestive tract may be super sensitive to abdominal pain or discomfort.
Other potential causes of IBS include:

Gut bacteria: Research has shown that people with IBS may have altered bacteria in their GI tract, contributing to symptoms. Studies have shown that the types and amounts of gut bacteria are different in people with IBS than in people without it.
Severe infections: Some people get diagnosed with IBS after a severe infection affecting their GI tract, suggesting germs may play a role.
Food intolerance: Sensitivities or allergies to certain foods may contribute to IBS.
Childhood stress: IBS is more common in people who experienced severe stressors in childhood, including physical, sexual and emotional abuse.
IBS triggers
If you have IBS, you may have noticed that certain things trigger symptoms. A trigger doesn’t cause the condition itself, but it can cause or worsen a symptom flare-up. Common triggers include:

Periods: You may notice symptoms worsen predictability according to your menstrual cycle.
Certain foods: Food triggers vary from person to person. Still, common culprits that can trigger an IBS symptom flare-up include dairy, foods that contain gluten (like wheat) and foods/drinks known to make you gassy.
Stress: Some researchers suggest that IBS is your gut’s response to stress. Related, this is why IBS is sometimes called “nervous stomach” or “anxious stomach.”
Risk factors for IBS
IBS most often occurs in people in their late teens to early 40s. Women are up to twice as likely to get diagnosed with IBS. Other risk factors include:

Intolerance to certain foods.
Severe digestive tract infection.
History of abuse.
Diagnosis of anxiety, depression or post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Many people with IBS also have other chronic pain conditions. Conditions associated with an increased risk of IBS include:

Fibromyalgia.
Chronic fatigue syndrome.
Chronic pelvic pain.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is IBS diagnosed?
The first step in diagnosing IBS is a detailed medical history. Your provider will ask about your symptoms. They may ask:

Do you have pain related to bowel movements?
Do you notice a change in how often you have a bowel movement?
Has there been a change in how your poop looks?
How often do you have symptoms?
When did your symptoms start?
What medicines do you take?
Have you been sick or had a stressful event in your life recently?
Depending on your symptoms, you may need other tests to confirm a diagnosis. There isn’t a single test to diagnose IBS. Instead, your provider will determine if you have IBS by:

Asking about your symptoms.
Making sure you’re up to date on your colon cancer screening.
Checking that you don’t have symptoms suggesting other disorders.
Lab tests
Most lab tests exclude other conditions that may be causing your symptoms, like an infection, food intolerance or a different digestive condition, like inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Not everyone needs the same tests.

Blood test: To check for a digestive disease condition or another condition that may cause your symptoms.
Stool test: To check for an infection or signs of inflammation in your bowel caused by a digestive condition.
Hydrogen breath test: To see if you have an overgrowth of bacteria in your gut (SIBO) or a food intolerance.
Imaging tests
You may need imaging procedures to rule out conditions involving inflammation or abnormal growths in your GI tract.

Colonoscopy: Can help your provider determine if you have certain bowel disorders that may be causing your symptoms, including polyps, IBD and cancerous growths. For this procedure, a provider inserts a scope that allows them to view your entire colon.
Flexible sigmoidoscopy: Similar to a colonoscopy, except a provider inserts a scope that allows them to view the lining of your rectum and the lower part of your colon only.
Upper endoscopy: Can help your provider diagnose celiac disease or other GI conditions. This procedure uses a scope that allows your provider to see inside your esophagus (food tube), stomach and the first part of your small intestine (duodenum).
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for IBS?
No specific therapy works for everyone, but most people with IBS can find a treatment plan that works for them. Typical treatment options include changing the foods you eat and your routine. Medications can help, too. Behavioral health therapy may help.

Many of these treatments take time to work. They can help your symptoms, but your symptoms may not go away completely.

Meal changes
A dietitian can help you choose foods and modify eating/drinking habits to avoid symptom flare-ups. They may recommend that you:

Increase fiber in your diet. Fiber-rich foods, including fruits, vegetables, grains, prunes and nuts, can help if you’re struggling with constipation. Introduce fiber slowly into your diet to give your gut time to adjust.
Add supplemental fiber to your diet. Another option is to try fiber supplements, like Metamucil® or Citrucel®.
Limit dairy products, like cheese and milk. Lactose intolerance is more common in people with IBS. If you cut back on dairy, make sure to eat nondairy foods rich in calcium, like broccoli, spinach or salmon.
Limit foods that can make you gassy. Foods like beans, brussels sprouts and cabbage are notorious for causing gas, but carbonated sodas and even chewing gum can make you gassy. Reduce these foods to go easier on your gut.
Avoid gluten. People with IBS — even those without celiac disease — tend to be more sensitive to gluten. If you opt for a gluten-free diet, work with your provider to ensure you’re getting enough of the key vitamins and minerals (like fiber, iron and calcium) often found in foods with gluten.
Try the low FODMAP diet. This food plan reduces the amount of hard-to-digest carbohydrates you eat. It recommends alternatives that allow you to get the nutrients you need while going easier on your GI tract.
Drink plenty of water. Drink at least eight 8-ounce glasses of water a day (2 liters). Water keeps your GI tract lubricated and can help treat or prevent constipation.
Keep a food diary. Your provider may recommend that you note the foods you eat to determine which foods trigger IBS flare-ups and then bring this to a nutritionist.
Activity changes
Changing daily activities can help, too. Your provider may recommend that you:

Exercise regularly. Aim for 150 minutes of moderate exercise weekly. This is about 30 minutes a day, five days a week. “Moderate” means you’re raising your heart rate.
Try relaxation techniques. Daily yoga, meditation and other de-stressing techniques can help calm an overtaxed nervous system and a “nervous gut.” Sometimes, a behavioral therapist can help.
Get enough sleep. Aim for seven to nine hours of quality sleep each night. Go to bed at the same time each night. A good night’s rest is one of the most powerful de-stressors available. Reach out to a provider if you’re having trouble sleeping.
Keep an activity diary. Record the activities that help you manage your IBS and compare notes with your provider.
Therapy
Many people with IBS benefit from seeing a therapist. Therapy can help you get a handle on stress and conditions such as anxiety and depression that contribute to IBS. Some people find relief through:

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT).
Hypnotherapy.
Biofeedback.
Medications
Your healthcare provider may prescribe medications to provide symptom relief, including:

Antidepressants (if you have depression and anxiety along with significant abdominal pain). Medications include tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).
Medications to ease constipation (including fiber supplements and laxatives).
Medications to firm stools (anti-diarrheals).
Medications to help with intestinal spasms.
Although research into their effectiveness is ongoing, your provider may recommend probiotics. These “good bacteria” may help relieve IBS symptoms.

Medications specifically used to treat IBS include:

Dicyclomine (Bentyl®).
Hyoscyamine (Levsin®).
Lubiprostone (Amitiza®).
Linaclotide (Linzess®).
Plecanatide (Trulance®).
Rifaximin (Xifaxan®).
Is there a cure for IBS?
There isn’t a cure for IBS. But, most people manage symptoms by avoiding triggers and taking medications when necessary.

Outlook / Prognosis
Does having IBS increase my risk of developing serious gastrointestinal problems?
No, IBS doesn’t put you at higher risk of developing conditions such as colitis, Crohn’s disease or colon cancer.

What can I expect if I have IBS?
Living with IBS can be challenging because symptoms come and go throughout your life. Treatment often involves trial and error. But the good news is that nearly everyone with IBS can find a treatment that helps them over time.

Usually, changing the foods you eat and your activity levels improve symptoms with time. You may need some patience as you figure out your triggers and take steps to avoid them. Your symptoms may not completely disappear. But, after a few weeks or months, you should notice a significant improvement in how you feel.

Prevention
Can I prevent IBS?
Since there’s no known cause for IBS, you can’t prevent or avoid it. If you have IBS, you can keep symptoms from flaring up by avoiding triggers.

Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
See your provider if your symptoms continue for more than three months or if they’re getting worse. If you have symptoms less often, but they interfere with your life, it’s still a good idea to talk to your primary care provider.

Some symptoms may indicate a more serious problem. Contact your provider as soon as possible if you have common IBS symptoms alongside:

Fever.
Vomiting.
Rectal bleeding.
Unexplained weight loss.
Diarrhea so severe it wakes you up at night.
Severe abdominal pain (especially that doesn’t improve when you poop or pass gas).

Acid Reflux / GERD – heartburn and digestive discomfort

What is acid reflux?
Your stomach contents are supposed to travel only one way: down. When acid from inside your stomach flows backward — meaning, up — into your esophagus and throat, it’s called acid reflux.

When acid creeps into places it doesn’t belong, you’re bound to feel it. Acid irritates and inflames the tissues inside your esophagus, which runs from your stomach up through your chest to your throat.

Almost everyone has experienced an occasional episode of acid reflux. It might feel like indigestion — burning stomach pain after eating — or heartburn — burning chest pain close to your sternum.

Occasional acid reflux is uncomfortable, but it’s not a disease. But some people have reflux all the time. Chronic acid reflux can really affect your quality of life, and it can also do real damage to your tissues.

Back to video


What’s the difference between GERD and stomach ulcers?
What is GERD?
GERD stands for gastroesophageal reflux disease. Depending on where you live, it may be spelled GORD for gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. However you spell it, GERD is chronic acid reflux in your esophagus. Acid reflux is considered chronic when you’ve had it at least twice a week for several weeks.

Temporary conditions can cause temporary acid reflux. But GERD is a constant, mechanical problem. It means that the mechanisms that are supposed to keep acid out of your esophagus aren’t working right.

How common are acid reflux and GERD?
Occasional, uncomplicated gastroesophageal reflux (GER) and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) are both common. GERD is estimated to affect about 20% of adults and 10% of children in the U.S.

Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of acid reflux and GERD?
Symptoms of acid reflux and GERD may include:

Backwash. You might notice acid, food or liquids backwashing from your stomach into your throat after eating. This is also called regurgitation. You might notice the sour taste of the acid.
A burning feeling. Acid literally burns the tissues in your esophagus. If it feels like it’s in your chest, it’s called heartburn. If it feels closer to your stomach, you might call it acid indigestion.
Noncardiac chest pain. Some people feel pain in their esophagus that doesn’t feel like burning. Esophagus pain triggers the same nerves as heart-related pain does, so it might feel like that.
Nausea. Acid overflow or backwash may make you feel queasy or make you lose your appetite. Although you may have eaten a while ago, it may feel like there’s still more food to digest.
Sore throat. If acid rises into your throat, it can make it sore. It might feel like there’s a lump in your throat, or like it’s hard to swallow. Reflux into your throat often happens at night.
Asthma symptoms. GERD can trigger asthma-like symptoms, like chronic coughing, wheezing and shortness of breath. If acid particles get into your airways, it can make them contract.
GERD symptoms may be worse:

At night or while lying down.
After a large or fatty meal.
After bending over.
After smoking or drinking alcohol.
Do babies get GERD?
It’s normal for babies to spit up (regurgitate). There might be some acid in it, but usually not enough to really bother them. GERD is a more severe condition that causes distress or complications with feeding.

Babies are more likely to have GERD if they’re born prematurely or with a condition that affects their esophagus. A pediatrician might check for GERD if your baby seems to be struggling in some way.

Symptoms of GERD in babies (or small children) may include:

Excessive fussiness.
Difficulty sleeping.
Refusing to feed.
Small vomiting episodes.
Wheezing or hoarseness.
Bad breath.
What causes acid reflux?
For acid to get into your esophagus, it needs to get past the valve at the bottom of your esophagus that usually keeps things from coming back up. This valve is called your lower esophageal sphincter (LES).

Your LES is a circular muscle that opens when you swallow and then closes again to keep substances in your stomach. It also opens a little to let gas bubbles out when you’re burping or have hiccups.

Acid reflux happens when your LES weakens or relaxes enough to let acid pass. Some temporary things can relax your LES, like lying down after a large meal. But if you have GERD, it means your LES is relaxing often.

Many things can contribute to weakening your LES, either temporarily or permanently. Sometimes occasional acid reflux turns into chronic GERD when these factors overlap or persist for a long time.

Common causes of acid reflux and GERD include:

Hiatal hernia. A hiatal hernia happens when the top of your stomach pushes up through the hole in your diaphragm where your esophagus passes through. It squeezes in next to your esophagus, compressing them both and trapping acid. It also moves your LES above your diaphragm, where it loses some of its muscular support. Hiatal hernias are very common, especially as you get older. They usually occur gradually, and they can gradually worsen.
Pregnancy. Pregnancy is a common cause of temporary acid reflux. The pressure and volume in your abdomen can push, stretch and weaken the muscles in your diaphragm that support your LES. Pregnancy hormones may also encourage your LES to relax. Pregnancy brings high levels of the hormone relaxin, which relaxes your muscles so they can stretch to make room for the fetus. It also brings high levels of estrogen and progesterone, which may also relax your LES.
Obesity. Obesity increases the pressure and volume in your abdomen, which affects your LES similarly to how pregnancy does. Obesity also tends to last longer than pregnancy, which can weaken the muscles more permanently. It’s a common contributing factor to developing a hiatal hernia. Since fat tissue secretes estrogen, having more of it also raises your estrogen levels.
Smoking. Tobacco smoke relaxes your LES, whether you’re the one smoking or you’re exposed to second-hand smoke. Smoking also triggers coughing, which opens your LES. Smoking and chronic coughing can weaken your diaphragm muscles and contribute to developing a hiatal hernia. Smoking also slows down your digestion and causes your stomach to produce more acid.
Other possible causes of GERD include:

Birth defects. Congenital defects like esophageal atresia and hernias can affect your LES.

Connective tissue diseases. Diseases like scleroderma may affect your esophagus muscles.

Prior surgery. Surgery in your chest or upper abdomen may have injured your esophagus.

Medications. Certain medications can have a relaxing effect on your LES, including:

Benzodiazepines, a type of sedative.
Calcium channel blockers, which treat high blood pressure.
Tricyclic antidepressants, which treat depression and pain.
NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) like aspirin and ibuprofen.
Theophylline, a common asthma medication.
Hormone therapy (HT) medications for menopause.
Can foods cause acid reflux?
Foods and drinks probably aren’t enough to cause acid reflux alone, but they can contribute to it. Chocolate, coffee, alcohol, mint, garlic and onions may have a relaxing effect on your LES in higher doses.

Fatty foods increase stomach acid and take longer to digest, so there’s more opportunity for acid to escape. If you have a heavier meal for dinner, it might not have time to digest before you lie down.

What are the possible complications of chronic acid reflux (GERD)?
Stomach acid is powerful stuff, built to break down the food you eat for digestion. Your stomach has a tough inner lining to protect it from its own acid. But your other organs don’t have this protection.

Acid reflux mostly affects your esophagus, though sometimes it can get into your windpipe or even your airways. A little acid may just feel momentarily uncomfortable. But a lot of acid will injure these organs.

Possible complications include:

Esophagitis. Esophagitis is inflammation in the lining of your esophagus. Chronic esophagitis can cause chronic pain and complications, like ulcers in your esophagus. After a long time, it can cause tissue changes like scarring or intestinal metaplasia, a precancerous condition.
Barrett’s esophagus. Barret’s esophagus is the name for intestinal metaplasia of your esophagus. It means that the tissues lining your esophagus change to look like intestinal lining. This change happens after long exposure to acid and inflammation. It’s a risk factor for esophageal cancer.
Esophageal stricture. Your esophagus may also develop scar tissue to protect it from chronic inflammation and injury. Scar tissue can cause your esophagus to narrow. This is called stricture. Esophageal strictures can make it hard to swallow, which can make it hard to eat and drink.
Laryngopharyngeal reflux. Some people with GERD also develop LPR, which is reflux that travels into your throat. Acid might sneak up into your throat while you sleep. It can cause swelling, hoarseness and vocal cord growths, and you can also aspirate acid particles into your airways.
Asthma. Acid in your airways may aggravate existing asthma or cause asthma-like symptoms in people without any preexisting respiratory conditions. Tiny acid particles may irritate your bronchial tubes and cause them to contract, causing coughing and breathing difficulties.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is GERD diagnosed?
A gastroenterologist will evaluate your esophagus to diagnose GERD. Tests may include:

Esophagram. An esophagram is a type of X-ray exam. It takes moving X-rays (fluoroscopy) of your esophagus while you swallow. For the test, you swallow a chalky liquid called barium.
Upper endoscopy. An upper endoscopy involves looking inside your esophagus with a camera. The camera is on the end of a thin tube that passes through your mouth while you’re asleep under light sedation.
Esophageal pH test. This test measures the acid content inside your esophagus through a small wireless receiver. Your provider places the receiver in your esophagus during an endoscopy.
Esophageal manometry. This test measures the muscle activity in your esophagus, using pressure sensors embedded in a nasogastric tube. It can confirm if your LES or other muscles aren’t working right.
Management and Treatment
What is the medical treatment for GERD?
Some people find they can reduce acid reflux with lifestyle adjustments, like changing their eating habits, reducing alcohol and tobacco and losing weight. Healthcare providers encourage this approach.

But if you have chronic acid reflux or GERD, they also recommend medicines to reduce your stomach acid, so reflux is less damaging. These medicines are easily available and highly effective for GERD.

Medicine
Over-the-counter (OTC) medicines for acid reflux include:

Antacids. Antacids (like Tums® and Rolaids®) neutralize your stomach acid so that when reflux happens, it isn’t as corrosive to your esophagus. They work well for occasional acid reflux, but they can have side effects if you take them too often, so they aren’t a good long-term solution.
Alginates. Alginates are naturally occurring sugars derived from seaweed. They help block acid reflux by floating on top of the acid, creating a physical barrier between the acid and your esophagus. You can get alginates by themselves, and you can also get antacids with alginates.
Prescription medications for GERD include:

Histamine receptor antagonists (H2 blockers). H2 blockers reduce stomach acid by blocking the chemical that tells your body to produce it (histamine). You can take them more frequently than antacids, but they don’t always work long-term. Your body can adapt to their effects.
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). PPIs are stronger acid blockers that also promote healing. Your provider may prescribe them as a first-line treatment if your GERD is relatively severe or you have signs of tissue damage in your esophagus. They’re 90% effective in reducing acid reflux.
Baclofen. Baclofen is a muscle relaxant, often prescribed to reduce muscle spasms. It can also help reduce the frequency of LES relaxation events, which reduces the frequency of acid reflux. Baclofen isn’t a first-line treatment for acid reflux, but it may be a part of your treatment plan.
How do you get rid of acid reflux? Is there a cure?
While medicine can reduce the symptoms and the effects of GERD, it doesn’t stop it from happening. A severe case of GERD may continue to cause complications despite medication, even if you can’t feel it.

When this is the case, you need a more definitive treatment for acid reflux. This usually means a procedure to tighten your LES. These are minor, outpatient procedures, and they’re very effective.

Surgery
Surgery for GERD includes:

Nissen fundoplication. Fundoplication is the most common surgery for GERD. When possible, it’s done as a laparoscopic surgery, which means smaller incisions and less recovery time. A surgeon wraps the top of your stomach around your lower esophagus and secures it with stitches to tighten the junction between them. This is also the procedure to fix a hiatal hernia.
LINX device. A newer procedure implants a device called LINX during surgery. The LINX device is a ring of tiny magnets that help keep the junction between the stomach and esophagus closed.
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have acid reflux?
So many things contribute to acid reflux that it can be hard to tell what’s causing yours. Sometimes, simple lifestyle changes can make it go away. But some causes, like a hiatal hernia, may get worse.

If you have mild acid reflux, you can often manage it at home. If you have moderate to severe acid reflux, you might need a prescription to manage it. Medicine works for most people, but not all.

Whether your acid reflux bothers you a lot or a little, it’s a good idea to discuss it with a healthcare provider. They can assess whether it’s causing you complications that you may be unaware of.

If you have severe GERD or it causes complications that medicine can’t help, you might need surgery. But surgery is usually minor and effective. It’s worth treating GERD to prevent its complications.

Living With
What helps acid reflux at home?
To help manage acid reflux at home, try:

Eating smaller meals. Larger meals expand your stomach and put pressure on your LES. Smaller meals digest faster and don’t stimulate your stomach to produce so much acid.
Eating dinner earlier. Gravity plays a role in keeping acid down, so it’s a good idea to eat several hours before reclining in the living room or going to bed
Sleeping on your left side. This positions your lower esophageal sphincter in an air pocket above your stomach contents. Lying on your back or your right side submerges the valve.
Reducing abdominal pressure. Wear loose-fitting clothes or consider losing weight if you have overweight/obesity. This can help in the short term and the long term.
Quitting smoking and drinking. Both tobacco and alcohol weaken your LES. They also affect your stomach, making it more acidic and slowing your digestion time.
Over-the-counter medications. Antacids and alginates are good to have on hand, especially if you know you’re eating a rich or acidic meal that might trigger more stomach acid.
What to do during an acid reflux attack?
If it’s happening right now, try:

Standing up. Gravity is on your side.
Taking a sip of water. Don’t drink a lot, but small sips may help wash the acid down.
Loosening your waistband. Take off your belt or change your pants if it helps.
Taking an antacid. If you don’t have one, Pepto Bismol® might work.

Peptic Ulcer Disease – ulcers in stomach/duodenum

Peptic ulcer disease (PUD) is a condition that causes ulcers (open sores) to develop in the lining of your digestive tract. The word “peptic” comes from pepsin, a digestive enzyme that your stomach produces. Pepsin and stomach acid help break down food for digestion. These substances are highly corrosive.

Normally, a strong mucous lining protects your digestive tract from these substances. But in peptic ulcer disease, this protection breaks down. Pepsin and acids eat into the lining, forming ulcers. Most ulcers form in your stomach or duodenum, where these substances are most active. But they can also occur elsewhere.

Types of peptic ulcers
Peptic ulcers usually develop in your stomach or duodenum.

Duodenal ulcers account for almost 80% of peptic ulcers.
Stomach ulcers account for almost 20% of peptic ulcers.
Rarely, they can appear in other parts of your digestive tract:

Esophageal ulcers: Chronic acid reflux can erode the lining of your esophagus, which doesn’t have the same protection as your stomach.
Jejunal ulcers: These can occur after surgery that connects your stomach to your jejunum (gastrojejunostomy).
Symptoms and Causes
What are peptic ulcer disease symptoms?
Up to 70% of people with peptic ulcer disease don’t notice symptoms. But the most common ones are central upper abdominal pain (epigastric pain) and indigestion. Indigestion often happens after eating and feels like a burning or gnawing sensation.

Other possible symptoms related to peptic ulcer disease include:

Bloating
Burping
Heartburn
Loss of appetite
Nausea and vomiting
Pain that wakes you up at night
What causes peptic ulcer disease?
The mucous lining in your digestive tract protects it from acids and enzymes and helps repair damage, especially in your stomach and duodenum. PUD happens when something weakens these defenses.

It takes a long-term issue to lower these defenses enough for acid to erode the lining. Most cases are due to:

H. pylori infection: This common bacteria lives in your stomach and/or duodenum. Most people have no symptoms, but if it grows too much, it can damage the lining.
NSAID overuse: These common pain relievers (like aspirin and ibuprofen) are easy to get. But using them too often can upset the chemical balance in your stomach and duodenum.
Less common causes of peptic ulcer disease include:

Other infections
Chemotherapy
Crohn’s disease
Ischemia
Radiation therapy
Severe illness or injury
Stomach cancer
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
You can also get a peptic ulcer in your:

Jejunum: After gastric bypass surgery, the middle part of your small intestine becomes your new duodenum. But it doesn’t have the same protective lining.
Esophagus: From chronic inflammation (esophagitis), often a result of acid reflux (GERD). Other causes include infections, medications or autoimmune diseases.
Risk factors
You have a higher risk if you have an H. pylori infection, take NSAIDs often, or both. Other things, like smoking, alcohol and certain medications, can contribute to your risk.

Complications of peptic ulcer disease
Without treatment, PUD can lead to:

Gastrointestinal bleeding: Ongoing blood loss from an ulcer
Gastrointestinal perforation: An ulcer that makes a hole in your GI tract (this is an emergency)
Symptoms of these complications may include:

Blood in your stool
Blood in your vomit
Sudden, sharp stomach pain
Abdominal swelling and tenderness
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose peptic ulcer disease
If your symptoms suggest an ulcer, your provider will examine you and test for H. pylori infection. This might mean a breath test or stool test.

Imaging tests like a CT scan or GI X-ray can spot large ulcers. Many people get a final diagnosis from an upper endoscopy. This also allows your provider to test for H. pylori directly.

Management and Treatment
What are peptic ulcer disease treatments?
Most peptic ulcers heal with medication. But if you have complications (like a bleeding or perforated ulcer), you may need more care. Many issues can be treated during an endoscopy.

Medications
Medications can reduce acid, protect your lining and treat infection. They include:

Antibiotics for H. pylori
Cytoprotective agents to coat and protect your lining
H2 blockers to lower stomach acid
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) to lower acid and protect your lining
Procedures
If you have a bleeding ulcer, your provider may treat it during endoscopy by cauterizing the wound or injecting medication. A perforation may need stitches.

Rarely, people need surgery for ulcers that don’t heal or that keep coming back. This can involve:

Removing scar tissue or opening a blocked stomach outlet (pyloroplasty)
Cutting the nerve that triggers acid release (vagotomy)
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a provider if you think you might have a peptic ulcer. Over-the-counter medications may ease pain, but they won’t fix the root cause.

Even if your symptoms are mild, untreated ulcers can get worse. H. pylori can also lead to other problems, like stomach cancer.

Get emergency care if you have:

Severe stomach pain that doesn’t go away
Blood in your poop or vomit
Signs of severe blood loss, like pale skin or fainting
Outlook / Prognosis
Do peptic ulcers go away on their own?
They might, but only if the cause goes away. If you have H. pylori or another condition, you’ll need treatment. Even if NSAIDs were the cause and you’ve stopped taking them, you should still get checked to rule out infection.

What is the prognosis after treatment for peptic ulcer disease?
Most peptic ulcers heal within a few weeks. Most people take medications for about two months. Treatment is usually effective, but people with chronic conditions may need long-term therapy.

Your healthcare provider may test again after treatment to make sure the ulcer has healed and the infection is gone. H. pylori can come back, and ulcers may return if the cause isn’t addressed.

Prevention
Can peptic ulcer disease be prevented?
Yes. The two most important things you can do are:

Find and treat H. pylori. Most people don’t know they have it. A simple breath test can detect it. If you’ve had it before, consider retesting. It can come back.
Use NSAIDs carefully. Don’t take more than recommended. If you’ve had ulcers before, you may need to avoid them or take them with another medicine to protect your stomach.
Additional Common Questions
Should I adjust my diet while living with peptic ulcer disease?
Foods don’t cause peptic ulcers, but some can make symptoms worse, especially spicy or acidic foods. Alcohol and smoking can also aggravate ulcers. Avoid these if you have symptoms or a history of peptic ulcer disease.

Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) – linked to obesity and metabolic syndrome

What Is Fatty Liver Disease?
Fatty liver disease (FLD) means you have extra fat in your liver. You might hear your doctor call it hepatic steatosis. Most of the time, it doesn't cause symptoms, but over time a buildup of fat makes it harder for your liver to work.
With diet and exercise, fatty liver disease can be reversed. (Photo Credit: iStock/Getty Images)
Fatty Liver Disease Types
There are two main types of FLD:

1. Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD)

This type used to be called nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). It is very common in the U.S., affecting 1 in 3 adults. Researchers aren't exactly sure what causes it, but having obesity or metabolic disorders such as insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, central obesity, and hypertension will increase your risk of getting it. Unlike the other main type, you don't get it from drinking alcohol. There are two forms of MASLD:

Simple fatty liver: This means you have fat in your liver, but you may not have any inflammation in your liver or damage to your liver cells. It usually doesn’t get worse or cause problems with your liver. Most people with MASLD have simple fatty liver.
Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH): This used to be known as nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). It's the advanced stage of FLD and means you have inflammation in your liver. The inflammation and liver cell damage that happen with MASH can cause serious problems such as hepatic fibrosis and lead to cirrhosis, which are types of liver scarring, and liver cancer. These problems can lead to liver failure and require a liver transplant. NASH-related cirrhosis is already the leading indication for liver transplantation in women and those over 65 years of age. About 20% of people with MASLD have MASH.

Questions About Tracking Your Liver Health and MASH Progression?
Use this appointment guide to prepare for your visit and learn how to collaborate with your doctor for more personalized care.
2. Alcohol-related fatty liver disease (ALD)

This type is less common, affecting about 5% of people living in the U.S., and is caused by drinking alcohol. For this reason, it usually gets better if you stop drinking alcohol soon enough. If you keep drinking, ALD can cause serious problems that progress in stages: 

Enlarged liver. It doesn’t always cause symptoms, but you may have pain or discomfort on the upper right side of your belly.

Related:
A New Treatment Option for MASH
Alcoholic hepatitis. This is swelling in the liver that can cause fever, nausea, vomiting, belly pain, and jaundice (yellowish skin and eyes).

Alcoholic cirrhosis. This is a buildup of scar tissue that stops the liver from functioning normally. It can cause the same symptoms as alcoholic hepatitis, plus:

Large amounts of fluid buildup in your belly (the doctor will call it ascites)
High blood pressure in the liver
Bleeding in your body
Confusion and changes in behavior
Enlarged spleen (a small organ inside your rib cage that's part of your immune system)
Liver failure, which can be fatal
Alcohol-related fatty liver disease usually comes first. It can then get worse and become alcoholic hepatitis. Over time, it may turn into alcoholic cirrhosis.
If you drink heavily, talk with your doctor. It’s confidential, and they can help you get your drinking under control to save your health.

Brain / Neurological Diseases

Migraine – severe recurring headaches

What is a migraine?
A migraine is a severe headache that causes throbbing, pulsing head pain on one side of your head. The headache phase of a migraine usually lasts at least four hours, but it can also last for days. This headache gets worse with:

Physical activity.
Bright lights.
Loud noises.
Strong odors.
Migraines are disruptive. They can interfere with your daily routine and affect your ability to meet personal and social obligations. Treatment is available to help you manage migraines.

What are the types of migraines?
There are several types of migraines. The most common migraine categories are:

Migraine with aura (classic migraine).
Migraine without aura (common migraine).
An aura is a phase of the migraine before head pain begins.

Other types of migraines include:

Migraines in children (abdominal migraine).
Chronic migraine.
Hemiplegic migraine.
Menstrual migraine.
Migraine without headache (silent migraine).
Retinal migraine (ocular migraine).
Status migrainosus.
How common are migraines?
Migraines are common. Studies show that an estimated 12% of people in the United States experience migraines.

Symptoms and Causes
The four phases and common symptoms of a migraine
The symptoms of a migraine come in four phases. The most notable is a headache attack.
What are the phases of a migraine?
There are four phases or stages of a migraine:

Prodrome: The first phase begins up to 24 hours before you experience a headache.
Aura: An aura is a group of sensory, motor and/or speech symptoms that act as a warning sign of a migraine headache. The aura phase can last as long as 60 minutes or as little as five. You might experience both the aura and the headache at the same time.
Headache: A migraine headache lasts between four hours to 72 hours.
Postdrome: The postdrome stage usually lasts for a few hours up to 48 hours. Symptoms feel similar to an alcohol-induced hangover, which is why the postdrome phase is known as a migraine hangover.
It can take about eight to 72 hours to go through the four stages.

Migraine symptoms
Migraine symptoms vary based on the stage. Every migraine is different, and you won’t necessarily experience symptoms during all four stages of every migraine.

Prodrome symptoms
Mood changes.
Difficulty concentrating.
Trouble sleeping.
Fatigue.
Nausea.
Increased hunger and thirst.
Frequent urination.
Aura symptoms
Muscle weakness.
Vision changes.
Ringing in your ears (tinnitus).
Sensitivity to touch (feeling like someone is touching you).
Numbness and tingling.
Difficulty speaking or concentrating.
Headache attack symptoms
Head pain gradually gets more intense. It can affect one side of your head or both. It can occur with other symptoms like:

Nausea and vomiting.
Light, sound and odor sensitivity.
Postdrome symptoms
Fatigue.
Stiff neck.
Sensitivity to light and sound.
Difficulty concentrating.
Nausea.
Dizziness.
What does a migraine feel like?
Migraine headache pain may feel like the following:

Throbbing.
Pulsing.
Pounding.
Dull.
A migraine can feel different for each person. A migraine headache ranges from mild to severe. Head pain can start on one side and shift to the opposite side. You may also have pain around your eyes or temple, and sometimes, around your face, sinuses, jaw or neck.

How often do migraines happen?
The frequency of a migraine varies from person to person. You might have one migraine per year or one per week. On average, most people experience two to four per month. They’re most common in the morning. Most migraines are unpredictable, but sometimes, you can have an idea of when a migraine will happen, like before menstruation or after feeling stress.

What causes a migraine?
Researchers aren’t sure of the exact cause of migraines, but studies show genetics play a role.

When you have a headache, specific nerves in your blood vessels send pain signals to your brain. This releases inflammatory substances into your head’s nerves and blood vessels. It’s unclear why your nerves do that.

What triggers a migraine?
A trigger is something that causes symptoms to start. Some of the most common migraine triggers include:

Stress.
Hormonal changes.
Certain medications.
Changes to your sleep.
Weather condition changes.
Too much physical activity (overexertion).
Addictive substances like caffeine or tobacco.
Missing a meal.
Exposure to bright lights, loud noises or strong odors.
Your healthcare provider can help you identify your triggers. They might recommend keeping a migraine journal to track similarities between migraine attacks.

What foods trigger migraines?

Your body may have a sensitivity to specific chemicals and preservatives in foods. This sensitivity makes a migraine more likely to happen, especially if combined with other triggers.

Some of the most common food triggers include:

Aged cheese.
Beverages containing alcohol.
Chocolate.
Food additives like nitrates and MSG.
Processed or cured foods (hot dogs, pepperoni).
Fermented or pickled foods.
Are migraines hereditary?
Yes, migraines tend to run in biological families. Up to 80% of people with migraines have a first-degree biological relative with the condition.

What are the risk factors for a migraine?
A migraine can affect anyone at any age, from children to adults. Women are more likely than men to experience a migraine.

Other risk factors that may make you more likely to experience a migraine include:

Biological family history of migraines.
Underlying medical condition (depression, anxiety, sleep disorders and epilepsy).
Regular use of tobacco products.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a migraine diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose a migraine after a physical exam and neurological exam. They’ll also learn more about your medical history and biological family health history. Your provider may ask you questions to learn more about your symptoms, including:

What symptoms do you experience?
Can you describe the feeling and location of your headache?
How severe are your symptoms?
How long did your symptoms last?
Did anything make your headache better or worse?
Your provider may also order blood tests and imaging tests (such as a CT scan or an MRI) to make sure there aren’t any other causes for your headache. An electroencephalogram (EEG) may help your provider rule out other conditions.

Who diagnoses a migraine?
If you think you have a migraine, discuss your symptoms with a primary care physician (PCP) first. They can diagnose migraine headaches and start treatment. Your PCP may refer you to a headache specialist or a neurologist.

Management and Treatment
How is a migraine treated?
There isn’t a cure for migraines. But a healthcare provider can help you manage migraine symptoms through the following:

Taking medications.
Avoiding migraine triggers.
Using alternative migraine remedies.
What medications treat migraines?
A healthcare provider might recommend taking medications to treat migraines. There are two types of medications available:

Medications to stop migraines: You can take these medications at the first sign of a migraine. They stop or reduce migraine symptoms like pain, nausea, sensitivity and more.
Medications to prevent migraines: A healthcare provider usually prescribes preventive medications if you experience severe symptoms that interfere with your routine or have frequent migraines. These medications reduce how often and how severe migraines affect you. You can take these medications as directed, usually on a daily basis.
Common medications that stop migraines include:

Triptans (5-hydroxytryptamine).
Ditans (lasmiditan).
Gepants (rimegepant and ubrogepant).
Dihydroergotamine (prochlorperazine).
Antiemetic medications (metoclopramide).
Common preventive migraine medications include:

Antiseizure medications (valproic acid, topiramate).
Beta-blockers (atenolol, propranolol, nadolol).
Calcium channel blockers (verapamil).
Monoclonal antibodies(erenumab, fremanezumab, galcanezumab).
Tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline, nortriptyline, doxepin).
Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (venlafaxine, duloxetine).
Medications come in different forms, like:

An injection under your skin (subcutaneous).
An oral medication (taken by mouth).
A nasal spray.
Through an IV (intravenously).
Suppository.
You and your healthcare provider will discuss the specific medication, combination of medications and formulations to best manage your symptoms. All medications should be used under the direction of a headache specialist or provider. As with any medication, it’s important to carefully follow your provider’s instructions.

Over-the-counter migraine medications

Over-the-counter migraine medications are effective if you have mild to moderate migraine symptoms. The main ingredients in pain-relieving medications are ibuprofen, aspirin, acetaminophen, naproxen and caffeine.

Be cautious when taking over-the-counter pain relievers. Sometimes, overusing them can cause analgesic-rebound headaches or a dependency problem. If you’re taking any over-the-counter pain medications more than two to three times a week, let your healthcare provider know. They may suggest more effective prescription medications.

Avoiding migraine triggers
A healthcare provider can help you identify what triggers your migraines. They may ask you to keep a migraine journal or diary. A migraine journal can help you keep track of when a migraine happened, how you felt and how long it lasted. You can also add details about the foods you ate or the activities you participated in to learn more about any possible triggers.

There are some smartphone apps available to help you keep a migraine journal.

Once you identify a trigger, you can take steps to avoid it. This isn’t always possible, but awareness of your triggers is helpful to identify them and treat a migraine when it starts.

For example, if stress is a trigger, you may want to speak with a mental health professional to help you manage your stress. If you get migraine symptoms when you miss a meal, set an alarm on your phone to remind you to eat meals on a regular schedule.

Alternative migraine remedies
You may want to try alternative therapies to help you manage migraines. These include:

Taking vitamins, minerals or herbs like riboflavin (vitamin B2), magnesium, feverfew, butterbur or co-enzyme Q10.
Relaxation techniques like yoga.
Acupuncture.
Biofeedback.
Botulinum toxin type A injections (Botox®).
Talk to your healthcare provider before starting any alternative therapies for migraines.

What migraine treatments are available during pregnancy?
Talk to your healthcare provider if you’re pregnant or plan on becoming pregnant and experience migraines. Your provider might suggest avoiding medications for migraines when you’re pregnant or if you think you may be pregnant. Some medications can negatively affect the fetus’s development.

Your provider can recommend alternative treatment options like an acetaminophen pain reliever for migraines.

How do I deal with a migraine as it happens?
There are certain things you can do to help you feel better when a migraine attack happens, including:

Resting in a dark, quiet, cool room.
Applying a cold or warm compress or washcloth to your forehead or behind your neck.
Massaging your scalp.
Applying pressure to your temples in a circular motion.
Keeping yourself in a calm state (meditating).
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for a migraine?
Migraines are different for each person. They’re temporary but recurring throughout your life. There’s also no available cure. Your healthcare provider can help you manage migraines so they go away faster and are less intense. It may take time to find a treatment option that’s right for you. Let your healthcare provider know if your symptoms improve or get worse.

Prevention
Can a migraine be prevented?
You can’t prevent all migraines. But you can take preventive migraine medications as directed by your healthcare provider to reduce how often and how severe migraine symptoms affect you. You can also learn more about your triggers and work with your healthcare provider to avoid them.

Alzheimer’s Disease – neurodegenerative memory loss

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia. Alzheimer’s is pronounced “alz-HAI-mers.” It’s a neurodegenerative disease that affects your brain. This means it damages and destroys cells in your brain over time. Eventually, people with AD lose some of their brain functions, including memory and language.

Alzheimer’s disease affects approximately 24 million people worldwide. One in 10 people older than 65 have it. Nearly 1 in 3 people older than 85 have AD.

Healthcare providers can suggest treatments to manage symptoms, but there’s no cure for Alzheimer’s disease. Talk to a provider if you’re worried you or a loved one have AD symptoms.

Signs and Symptoms
Alzheimer’s disease symptoms include a decline in reasoning, memory, language and mood
Talk to a healthcare provider if you’re worried you or a loved one have Alzheimer’s disease symptoms.
What are Alzheimer’s disease symptoms?
Alzheimer’s disease affects everyone differently. But in general, it can weaken or completely eliminate your:

Memory
Reasoning
Language
Behavior and personality
Spatial understanding
People with memory loss or other Alzheimer’s symptoms may have difficulty recognizing changes in their own mind and body. These signs may be more obvious to loved ones.

Symptoms will get noticeably worse over time (a progressive decline). See a healthcare provider right away if you or a loved one have any dementia-like symptoms.

Memory
Memory loss is the most common Alzheimer’s symptom. It can affect your ability to recall recent events (short-term memory) or things that happened a long time ago (long-term memory).

You may have trouble remembering:

Faces or names
Facts
Where you are (even in familiar places like at home)
Memory issues from AD are different and more serious than occasionally forgetting where you left your phone or wondering if you locked the door when you came home.

Reasoning
Someone with Alzheimer’s might seem confused or like they’re taking an unusually long time to make a choice or decision. This can affect your ability to:

Decide what to do next
Follow a recipe
Make plans
Language
Alzheimer’s disease can make it hard for you to speak, read or understand language (aphasia). You may:

Communicate or talk less than you used to
Mix-and-match languages (if you speak more than one)
Revert to speaking in the language you spoke most when you were growing up
Say or use the wrong word
Behavior and personality
You might notice mood or personality changes in a person with Alzheimer’s disease. They might:

Act more suspicious (even around people they’ve known for years)
Experience mood swings (including being more aggressive than usual)
Feel increased agitation, paranoia or hallucinations
Strop trusting themselves or loved ones
Everyone has a bad day or feels upset sometimes. But mood and personality changes caused by Alzheimer’s are more intense or sudden than everyday anger or grumpiness.

Spatial understanding
You may have a hard time understanding how close objects around you are from your body or feel less coordinated than usual. This can include:

Bumping into furniture
Having a tough time picking something up
Struggling to do delicate hand motions (like tie your shoes or type on a keyboard)
Experts classify Alzheimer’s disease with stages. These stages can refer to how close you are to having dementia, the Alzheimer’s severity or how quickly it developed.

Causes
What causes Alzheimer’s disease?
An abnormal build-up of proteins in your brain causes Alzheimer’s disease. Specifically, two proteins called amyloid and tau.

Your brain has billions of nerve cells called neurons. Your neurons let you think, learn, remember and plan. Amyloid protein sticks together in your brain cells, forming clumps called plaques. Tau proteins twist together in fiber-like strands called tangles. The plaques and tangles prevent neurons from working as they should. They block neurons’ ability to send electrical and chemical signals back and forth.

When amyloid and tau proteins build up in your brain, they slowly kill neurons. This causes permanent damage that leads to Alzheimer’s symptoms. Nerve cell death starts in one area of your brain and then spreads to other areas. It’s most common for Alzheimer’s to begin in the area of your brain that controls memory — your hippocampus.

Experts are still studying Alzheimer’s disease to learn more about what exactly causes these proteins to build up. Researchers think the protein build-up happens a long time before it causes symptoms. It might happen up to 10 years before you notice any changes.

Is Alzheimer’s disease hereditary?
Yes, Alzheimer’s can be hereditary (genetic).

Your risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease is 10% to 30% higher if you have a biological parent or sibling with it. You’re three times more likely than average to develop AD if two or more of your biological siblings have it.

Having the APOE ε4 gene increases your risk of developing Alzheimer’s. It’s also associated with developing AD at a younger age (an earlier age of onset). But not everyone who has the APOE ε4 gene will get Alzheimer’s. It’s just one factor that can increase your risk.

What are Alzheimer’s risk factors?
Researchers don’t know why some people get Alzheimer’s disease and others don’t. Some risk factors may include:

Being Black or Latino
Environmental factors (something about where you live, work or spend a lot of time)
Genetic changes
Having a traumatic brain injury
Smoking
Your age (AD usually affects people older than 65)
Your overall health
Some health conditions may increase your Alzheimer’s risk, including:

Cardiovascular disease
Diabetes
Down syndrome caused by trisomy 21
High blood pressure
High cholesterol
Obesity
What are the complications of Alzheimer’s disease?
The biggest complication of Alzheimer’s disease is the damage it does to your brain. That can cause permanent changes to your ability to think, to use your body and to your personality. As the condition progresses, you’re likely to experience complications, some of which can be fatal.

Complications can include:

An overall decline in physical health
Infections (like pneumonia or skin infections)
Seizures
Trouble breathing
Trouble swallowing
You may lose your ability to control your body. This can increase your risk of:

Bedsores
Dehydration or malnutrition
Falls, bone fractures and other traumatic injuries
Losing control of your pee (urinary incontinence) and poop (bowel incontinence)
Tooth decay, cavities and other dental issues
Diagnosis and Tests
How is Alzheimer’s disease diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose Alzheimer’s disease in a few ways. The first step is discussing your current health and medical history.

Your provider will talk to you and your loved ones. They’ll ask you questions to understand your health and daily routine. Tell your provider if you know you have any risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease.

Your provider will ask your loved ones if they’ve noticed any symptoms or changes you might not be able to see in yourself. They might ask about your:

Ability to do your usual activities
Changes in your mood, behavior and personality
Current medications
Medical history
Overall health
Your provider will also give you a complete physical exam and neurological exam. They’ll rule out other conditions that cause similar memory issues and other symptoms.

Your provider will also use a few tests, including:

Blood tests
Brain MRI
Cognitive tests
CT scan
PET scan
Psychiatric and mental health evaluations
Urine tests
These tests can help your provider look for signs of amyloid proteins and see if they have damaged your brain.

Your provider will work with you and your loved ones to develop a treatment plan that fits your unique needs. They’ll help you set realistic goals for your short-term health and long-term outlook.

Management and Treatment
What are Alzheimer’s disease treatments?
Your provider will suggest treatments to slow down how fast you develop dementia. There’s no cure for Alzheimer’s, but treatments may manage symptoms as they happen and slow down the condition’s progression.

Starting treatment as soon as possible is the best way to maintain your brain health throughout your life. But there currently isn’t a treatment available that stops or reverses Alzheimer’s disease.

There are many medications that can manage Alzheimer’s symptoms. Your provider will suggest a combination that fits your unique needs. You might need:

Cholinesterase inhibitors
These medications block an enzyme that can speed up how quickly Alzheimer’s damages your brain. They can improve some memory problems and reduce your risk of behavior changes. Your provider might prescribe:

Donepezil
Galantamine
Rivastigmine
Clinical trials
Scientists are always researching Alzheimer’s disease and possible treatments. Ask your provider if there are any clinical trials that could help you. Clinical trials are tests or research studies done using human volunteers who have a condition or issue. A trial might help you try new treatments that aren’t widely available yet.

There may be more opportunities to participate in clinical trials the sooner you’re diagnosed.

Lecanemab or donanemab
Lecanemab and donanemab are intravenous (IV) infusions. They’re two types of monoclonal antibodies. These are medications that can help your body’s immune system target and destroy amyloid proteins. They can slow down Alzheimer’s progression by getting rid of some of the amyloid before it damages your brain.

Lecanemab targets amyloid fibers before they stick together. Donanemab targets amyloid proteins that have already clumped together to form plaques.

Like all other treatments, these medications aren’t cures for Alzheimer’s disease. And they can’t reverse any damage that amyloid has already done.

NMDA antagonists
If you have Alzheimer’s, your body makes too much glutamate, which damages your brain’s cells. NMDA antagonists block or fill up the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors glutamate binds to in your brain. This can slow down how fast Alzheimer’s progresses.

Memantine is a common NMDA antagonist. Your provider may suggest others depending on your health and which stage of Alzheimer’s disease you have.

Symptom-management medications
Your provider will suggest medications or other treatments to manage specific symptoms as they develop. You may need:

Antidepressants. These drugs can treat anxiety, restlessness, mood swings and depression.
Antipsychotics (neuroleptics). These drugs can treat paranoia, hallucinations and agitation.
Antiseizure medications. These medications can also sometimes treat mood changes.
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy?
Alzheimer’s disease affects everyone differently. Most people older than 65 with Alzheimer’s die within four to eight years of being diagnosed. But some people live for decades, especially if they were diagnosed before turning 65.

Talk to your provider about living with AD. They’ll help you set realistic goals and expectations. They can also help you and your loved ones decide when hospice care is a good option for you.

Talk to a mental health professional if you need support. It’s extremely common for people with AD and their loved ones to feel extra stress and anxiety, especially right after diagnosis. Those feelings are real and valid. A mental healthcare provider can help you process your thoughts and emotions.

Prevention
How can you prevent Alzheimer’s disease?
There are some Alzheimer’s risk factors you can’t change or control, like your age and genetics. But you may be able to manage other factors to help reduce your risk. Maintaining your overall health can help protect your brain from cognitive decline. You can try to:

Follow a healthy eating plan. Eating a variety of nutritious foods can help maintain your brain and overall health. Your provider might suggest you follow a specific eating plan like the Mediterranean or DASH diet.
Get plenty of physical activity. Exercise and physical activities increase blood flow and oxygen to your brain, which may improve your brain cell health. You don’t have to be a high-level athlete to stay active. Walking, gardening, riding a bike or any hobby that makes you move your body can be great ways to stay active.
Stay mentally active. Play board games, read, do crossword puzzles, play a musical instrument or do other hobbies that challenge your brain to use and learn new skills.
Stay socially connected. Regularly talk with your loved ones or people in your community. Joining group activities, such as religious services, exercise classes, book clubs or community volunteer work can all help keep your brain engaged.
Talk to your provider about genetic testing if you’re worried about Alzheimer’s running in your biological family. They can screen you for the genes or genetic changes that may increase your risk of AD.

Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider if you or a loved one are experiencing issues with memory or thinking. They can determine if the issues are due to Alzheimer’s or another condition.

You’ll need regular check-ups with your healthcare provider after you’ve been diagnosed with AD. Your provider will monitor the condition’s progression and adjust your treatments as needed.

You might want to ask your provider a few questions, like:

What symptoms or changes should I and my loved ones watch out for?
Is there any way to estimate how quickly Alzheimer’s will progress?
Which treatments are best for me?
Am I a good candidate for a clinical trial?

Parkinson’s Disease – movement disorder due to brain nerve damage

What is Parkinson’s disease?
Parkinson’s disease is a condition where a part of your brain deteriorates, causing more severe symptoms over time. While this condition is best known for how it affects muscle control, balance and movement, it can also cause a wide range of other effects on your senses, thinking ability, mental health and more.

Who does it affect?
The risk of developing Parkinson’s disease naturally increases with age, and the average age at which it starts is 60 years old. It’s slightly more common in males.

While Parkinson’s disease is usually age-related, it can happen in adults as young as 20 (though this is extremely rare, and often people have a parent, full sibling or child with the same condition).

How common is this condition?
Parkinson’s disease is very common overall, ranking second among age-related degenerative brain diseases. It’s also the most common motor (movement-related) brain disease. Experts estimate that it affects at least 1% of people over age 60 worldwide.

How does this condition affect my body?
Parkinson’s disease causes a specific area of your brain, the basal ganglia, to deteriorate. As this area deteriorates, you lose the abilities those areas once controlled. Researchers have uncovered that Parkinson’s disease causes a major shift in your brain chemistry.

Under normal circumstances, your brain uses chemicals known as neurotransmitters to control how your brain cells (neurons) communicate with each other. When you have Parkinson’s disease, you don’t have enough dopamine, one of the most important neurotransmitters.

When your brain sends activation signals that tell your muscles to move, it fine-tunes your movements using cells that require dopamine. That’s why lack of dopamine causes the slowed movements and tremors symptoms of Parkinson’s disease.

As Parkinson’s disease progresses, the symptoms expand and intensify. Later stages of the disease often affect how your brain functions, causing dementia-like symptoms and depression.

What is the difference between Parkinson’s disease vs. parkinsonism?
“Parkinsonism” is an umbrella term that describes Parkinson’s disease and conditions with similar symptoms. It can refer not only to Parkinson’s disease but also to other conditions like multiple system atrophy or corticobasal degeneration.

Symptoms and Causes
Parkinson’s disease symptoms, including non-motor and motor-related
Parkinson’s disease has several common non-motor (non-movement) symptoms and motor symptoms. Non-motor symptoms sometimes appear years ahead of motor symptoms.
What are the symptoms?
The best-known symptoms of Parkinson’s disease involve loss of muscle control. However, experts now know that muscle control-related issues aren’t the only possible symptoms of Parkinson’s disease.

Motor-related symptoms
Motor symptoms — which means movement-related symptoms — of Parkinson’s disease include the following:

Slowed movements (bradykinesia). A Parkinson’s disease diagnosis requires that you have this symptom. People who have this describe it as muscle weakness, but it happens because of muscle control problems, and there’s no actual loss of strength.
Tremor while muscles are at rest. This is a rhythmic shaking of muscles even when you’re not using them and happens in about 80% of Parkinson’s disease cases. Resting tremors are different from essential tremors, which don’t usually happen when muscles are at rest.
Rigidity or stiffness. Lead-pipe rigidity and cogwheel stiffness are common symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. Lead-pipe rigidity is a constant, unchanging stiffness when moving a body part. Cogwheel stiffness happens when you combine tremor and lead-pipe rigidity. It gets its name because of the jerky, stop-and-go appearance of the movements (think of it as the second hand on a mechanical clock).
Unstable posture or walking gait. The slowed movements and stiffness of Parkinson’s disease cause a hunched over or stooped stance. This usually appears as the disease gets worse. It’s visible when a person walks because they’ll use shorter, shuffling strides and move their arms less. Turning while walking may take several steps.
Additional motor symptoms can include:

Blinking less often than usual. This is also a symptom of reduced control of facial muscles.
Cramped or small handwriting. Known as micrographia, this happens because of muscle control problems.
Drooling. Another symptom that happens because of loss of facial muscle control.
Mask-like facial expression. Known as hypomimia, this means facial expressions change very little or not at all.
Trouble swallowing (dysphagia). This happens with reduced throat muscle control. It increases the risk of problems like pneumonia or choking.
Unusually soft speaking voice (hypophonia). This happens because of reduced muscle control in the throat and chest.
Non-motor symptoms
Several symptoms are possible that aren’t connected to movement and muscle control. In years past, experts believed non-motor symptoms were risk factors for this disease when seen before motor symptoms. However, there’s a growing amount of evidence that these symptoms can appear in the earliest stages of the disease. That means these symptoms might be warning signs that start years or even decades before motor symptoms.

Non-motor symptoms (with the potential early warning symptoms in bold) include:

Autonomic nervous system symptoms. These include orthostatic hypotension (low blood pressure when standing up), constipation and gastrointestinal problems, urinary incontinence and sexual dysfunctions.
Depression.
Loss of sense of smell (anosmia).
Sleep problems such as periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD), rapid eye movement (REM) behavior disorder and restless legs syndrome.
Trouble thinking and focusing (Parkinson’s-related dementia).
Stages of Parkinson’s disease
Parkinson’s disease can take years or even decades to cause severe effects. In 1967, two experts, Margaret Hoehn and Melvin Yahr, created the staging system for Parkinson’s disease. That staging system is no longer in widespread use because staging this condition is less helpful than determining how it affects each person’s life individually and then treating them accordingly.

Today, the Movement Disorder Society-Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) is healthcare providers’ main tool to classify this disease. The MDS-UPDRS examines four different areas of how Parkinson’s disease affects you:

Part 1: Non-motor aspects of experiences of daily living. This section deals with non-motor (non-movement) symptoms like dementia, depression, anxiety and other mental ability- and mental health-related issues. It also asks questions about pain, constipation, incontinence, fatigue, etc.
Part 2: Motor aspects of experiences of daily living. This section covers the effects on movement-related tasks and abilities. It includes your ability to speak, eat, chew and swallow, dress and bathe yourself if you have tremors, and more.
Part 3: Motor examination. A healthcare provider uses this section to determine the movement-related effects of Parkinson’s disease. The criteria measure effects based on how you speak, facial expressions, stiffness and rigidity, walking gait and speed, balance, movement speed, tremors, etc.
Part 4: Motor complications. This section involves a provider determining how much of an impact the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease are affecting your life. That includes both the amount of time you have certain symptoms each day, and whether or not those symptoms affect how you spend your time.
What causes the condition?
Although there are several recognized risk factors for Parkinson’s disease, such as exposure to pesticides, for now, the only confirmed causes of Parkinson’s disease are genetic. When Parkinson’s disease isn’t genetic, experts classify it as “idiopathic” (this term comes from Greek and means “a disease of its own”). That means they don’t know exactly why it happens.

Many conditions look like Parkinson’s disease but are instead parkinsonism (which refers to Parkinson’s disease-like conditions) from a specific cause like some psychiatric medications.

Familial Parkinson’s disease
Parkinson’s disease can have a familial cause, which means you can inherit it from one or both of your parents. However, this only makes up about 10% of all cases.

Experts have linked at least seven different genes to Parkinson’s disease. They’ve linked three of those to early onset of the condition (meaning at a younger-than-usual age). Some genetic mutations also cause unique, distinguishing features.

Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease
Experts believe idiopathic Parkinson’s disease happens because of problems with how your body uses a protein called α-synuclein (alpha sy-nu-clee-in). Proteins are chemical molecules that have a very specific shape. When some proteins don’t have the correct shape — a problem known as protein misfolding — your body can’t use them and can’t break them down.

With nowhere to go, the proteins build up in various places or in certain cells (tangles or clumps of these proteins are called Lewy bodies). The buildup of these Lewy bodies (which doesn’t happen with some of the genetic problems that cause Parkinson’s disease) causes toxic effects and cell damage.

Protein misfolding is common in many other disorders, such as Alzheimer’s disease, Huntington’s disease, multiple forms of amyloidosis and more.

Induced parkinsonism
There are conditions or circumstances experts have linked to parkinsonism. While these aren’t true Parkinson’s disease, they have similar features, and healthcare providers may consider these causes while diagnosing Parkinson’s disease.

The possible causes are:

Medications. Several medications can cause a parkinsonism-like effect. The Parkinson's-like effects are often temporary if you stop taking the medication that caused them before the effects become permanent. However, the effects can linger for weeks or even months after you stop taking the medication.
Encephalitis. Inflammation of your brain, known as encephalitis, can sometimes cause parkinsonism.
Toxins and poisons. Exposure to several substances, such as manganese dust, carbon monoxide, fumes from welding or certain pesticides, can lead to parkinsonism.
Damage from injuries. Repeated head injuries, such as those from high-impact or contact sports like boxing, football, hockey, etc., can cause brain damage. The term for this is “post-traumatic parkinsonism.”
Is it contagious?
Parkinson’s disease isn’t contagious, and you can’t contract it from another person.

Diagnosis and Tests
How is it diagnosed?
Diagnosing Parkinson’s disease is mostly a clinical process, meaning it relies heavily on a healthcare provider examining your symptoms, asking questions and reviewing your medical history. Some diagnostic and lab tests are possible, but these are usually needed to rule out other conditions or certain causes.

But most lab tests aren’t necessary unless you don’t respond to treatment for Parkinson’s disease, which can indicate you have another condition.

What tests will be done to diagnose this condition?
When healthcare providers suspect Parkinson’s disease or need to rule out other conditions, various imaging and diagnostic tests are possible. These include:

Blood tests (these can help rule out other forms of parkinsonism).
Computed tomography (CT) scan.
Genetic testing.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan.
New lab tests are possible
Researchers have found possible ways to test for possible indicators of Parkinson’s disease. Both of these new tests involve the alpha-synuclein protein but test for it in new, unusual ways. While these tests can’t tell you what conditions you have because of misfolded alpha-synuclein proteins, that information can still help your provider make a diagnosis.

The two tests use the following methods.

Spinal tap. One of these tests looks for misfolded alpha-synuclein proteins in cerebrospinal fluid, which is the fluid that surrounds your brain and spinal cord. This test involves a spinal tap (lumbar puncture), where a healthcare provider inserts a needle into your spinal canal to collect some cerebrospinal fluid for testing.
Skin biopsy. Another possible test involves a biopsy of surface nerve tissue. A biopsy includes collecting a small sample of your skin, including the nerves in the skin. The samples come from a spot on your back and two spots on your leg. Analyzing the samples can help determine if your alpha-synuclein has a certain kind of malfunction that could increase the risk of developing Parkinson’s disease.
Management and Treatment
How is it treated, and is there a cure?
For now, Parkinson’s disease isn’t curable, but there are multiple ways to manage its symptoms. The treatments can also vary from person to person, depending on their specific symptoms and how well certain treatments work. Medications are the primary way to treat this condition.

A secondary treatment option is surgery to implant a device that will deliver a mild electrical current to part of your brain (this is known as deep brain stimulation). There are also some experimental options, such as stem cell-based treatments, but their availability often varies, and many aren’t an option for people with Parkinson’s disease.

What medications and treatments are used?
Medication treatments for Parkinson’s disease fall into two categories: Direct treatments and symptom treatments. Direct treatments target Parkinson’s itself. Symptom treatments only treat certain effects of the disease.

Medications
Medications that treat Parkinson’s disease do so in multiple ways. Because of that, drugs that do one or more of the following are most likely:

Adding dopamine. Medications like levodopa can increase the available levels of dopamine in your brain. This medication is almost always effective, and when it doesn’t work, that’s usually a sign of some other form of parkinsonism rather than Parkinson’s disease. Long-term use of levodopa eventually leads to side effects that make it less effective.
Simulating dopamine. Dopamine agonists are medications that have a dopamine-like effect. Dopamine is a neurotransmitter, causing cells to act in a certain way when a dopamine molecule latches onto them. Dopamine agonists can latch on and cause cells to behave the same way. These are more common in younger patients to delay starting levodopa.
Dopamine metabolism blockers. Your body has natural processes to break down neurotransmitters like dopamine. Medications that block your body from breaking down dopamine allow more dopamine to remain available to your brain. They're especially useful early on and can also help when combined with levodopa in later stages of Parkinson's disease.
Levodopa metabolism inhibitors. These medications slow down how your body processes levodopa, helping it last longer. These medications may need careful use because they can have toxic effects and damage your liver. They’re most often used to help as levodopa becomes less effective.
Adenosine blockers. Medications that block how certain cells use adenosine (a molecule used in various forms throughout your body) can have a supportive effect when used alongside levodopa.
Several medications treat specific symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. Symptoms treated often include the following:

Erectile and sexual dysfunction.
Fatigue or sleepiness.
Constipation.
Sleep problems.
Depression.
Dementia.
Anxiety.
Hallucinations and other psychosis symptoms.
Deep brain stimulation
In years past, surgery was an option to intentionally damage and scar a part of your brain that was malfunctioning because of Parkinson’s disease. Today, that same effect is possible using deep-brain stimulation, which uses an implanted device to deliver a mild electrical current to those same areas.

The major advantage is that deep-brain stimulation is reversible, while intentional scarring damage is not. This treatment approach is almost always an option in later stages of Parkinson’s disease when levodopa therapy becomes less effective, and in people who have tremor that doesn’t seem to respond to the usual medications.

Experimental treatments
Researchers are exploring other possible treatments that could help with Parkinson’s disease. While these aren’t widely available, they do offer hope to people with this condition. Some of the experimental treatment approaches include:

Stem cell transplants. These add new dopamine-using neurons into your brain to take over for damaged ones.
Neuron-repair treatments. These treatments try to repair damaged neurons and encourage new neurons to form.
Gene therapies and gene-targeted treatments. These treatments target specific mutations that cause Parkinson’s disease. Some also boost the effectiveness of levodopa or other treatments.
Complications or side effects possible with treatments
The complications and side effects that happen with Parkinson’s disease treatments depend on the treatments themselves, the severity of the condition, any other health issues you have, and more. Your healthcare provider is the best person to tell you more about the likely side effects and complications that you might experience. They can also tell you what you can do to minimize how those side effects or complications affect your life.

More about levodopa

The most common and effective treatment for Parkinson’s disease is levodopa. While this medication has greatly improved the treatment of Parkinson’s disease, providers use it cautiously because of how it works. They also commonly prescribe other medications that make levodopa more effective or help with side effects and certain symptoms.

Levodopa is often combined with other medications to keep your body from processing it before it enters your brain. That helps avoid other side effects of dopamine, especially nausea, vomiting and low blood pressure when you stand up (orthostatic hypotension).

Over time, the way your body uses levodopa changes, and levodopa can also lose its effectiveness. Increasing your dose can help with that, but that increases the chance and severity of side effects, and the dose can only go so high before it reaches toxic levels.

How can I take care of myself or manage the symptoms?
Parkinson’s disease isn’t a condition you can self-diagnose, and you shouldn’t try to manage the symptoms without first talking to a healthcare provider.

How soon after treatment will I feel better, and how long will it take to recover?
The time it takes to recover and see the effects of Parkinson’s disease treatments depends strongly on the type of treatments, the severity of the condition and other factors. Your healthcare provider is the best person to offer more information about what you can expect from treatment. The information they give you can consider any unique factors that might affect what you experience.

Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Parkinson’s disease is a degenerative condition, meaning the effects on your brain get worse over time. However, this condition usually takes time to get worse. Most people have a normal life span with this condition.

You’ll need little to no help in the earlier stages and can keep living independently. As the effects worsen, you’ll need medication to limit how the symptoms affect you. Most medications, especially levodopa, are moderately or even very effective once your provider finds the minimum dose you need to treat your symptoms.

Most of the effects and symptoms are manageable with treatment, but the treatments become less effective and more complicated over time. Living independently will also become more and more difficult as the disease worsens.

How long does Parkinson’s disease last?
Parkinson’s disease isn’t curable, which means it’s a permanent, lifelong condition.

What’s the outlook for Parkinson’s disease?
Parkinson’s disease isn’t fatal, but the symptoms and effects are often contributing factors to death. The average life expectancy for Parkinson’s disease in 1967 was a little under 10 years.

Since then, the average life expectancy has increased by about 55%, rising to more than 14.5 years. That, combined with the fact that Parkinson’s diagnosis is much more likely after age 60, means this condition doesn’t often affect your life expectancy by more than a few years (depending on the life expectancy in your country).

Prevention
How can I reduce my risk or prevent this condition?
Parkinson’s disease happens for either genetic reasons or unpredictably. Neither is preventable, and you can’t reduce your risk of developing it. There are certain high-risk occupations such as farming and welding, but not everyone in these professions develops parkinsonism.

Living With
How do I take care of myself?
If you have Parkinson’s disease, the best thing you can do is follow the guidance of your healthcare provider on how to take care of yourself.

Take your medication as prescribed. Taking your medications can make a huge difference in the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. You should take your medications as prescribed and talk to your provider if you notice side effects or start to feel like your medications aren't as effective.
See your provider as recommended. Your healthcare provider will set up a schedule for you to see them. These visits are especially important to help with managing your conditions and finding the right medications and dosages.
Don’t ignore or avoid symptoms. Parkinson’s disease can cause a wide range of symptoms, many of which are treatable by treating the condition or the symptoms themselves. Treatment can make a major difference in keeping symptoms from having worse effects.

Epilepsy – recurrent seizures

What Is Epilepsy?
Epilepsy is a long-term (chronic) disease that causes repeated seizures due to abnormal electrical signals produced by damaged brain cells. A burst of uncontrolled electrical activity within brain cells causes a seizure. Seizures can include changes to your awareness, muscle control (your muscles may twitch or jerk), sensations, emotions and behavior.

Epilepsy is also called a seizure disorder.

Who does epilepsy affect?
Anyone, of any age, race or sex, can develop epilepsy.

How common is epilepsy?
In the U.S., about 3.4 million people have epilepsy. Of this number, 3 million are adults and 470,000 are children. There are 150,000 new cases of epilepsy in the U.S. each year. Worldwide, about 65 million people have epilepsy.

What happens in your brain when you have epilepsy?
The cells in your brain send messages to and receive messages from all areas of your body. These messages are transmitted via a continuous electrical impulse that travels from cell to cell. Epilepsy disrupts this rhythmic electrical impulse pattern. Instead, there are bursts of electrical energy — like an unpredictable lightning storm — between cells in one or more areas of your brain. This electrical disruption causes changes in your awareness (including loss of consciousness), sensations, emotions and muscle movements.

What are the types of epilepsies and their seizure symptoms?
Healthcare providers classify epilepsies by their seizure type. Seizure categories are based on where they start in your brain, your level of awareness during a seizure and by presence or absence of muscle movements.

There are two major seizure groups:

Focal onset seizures
Focal onset seizures start in one area, or network of cells, on one side of your brain. This seizure used to be called partial onset seizure. There are two types of focal seizures:

Focal onset aware seizure means you’re awake and aware during the seizure. Healthcare providers once called this a simple partial seizure. Symptoms may include:
Changes in your senses — how things taste, smell or sound.
Changes in your emotions.
Uncontrolled muscle jerking, usually in arms or legs.
Seeing flashing lights, feeling dizzy, having a tingling sensation.
Focal onset impaired awareness seizure means you’re confused or have lost awareness or consciousness during the seizure. This seizure type used to be called complex partial seizure. Symptoms may include:
Blank stare or a “staring into space.”
Repetitive movements like eye blinking, lip-smacking or chewing motion, hand rubbing or finger motions.
Generalized onset seizures
General onset seizures affect a widespread network of cells on both sides of your brain at the same time. There are six types of generalized seizures.

Absence seizures: This seizure type causes a blank stare or “staring into space” (a brief loss of awareness). There may be minor muscle movements, including eye blinking, lip-smacking or chewing motions, hand motions or rubbing fingers. Absence seizures are more common in children, last for only seconds (usually less than 10 seconds) and are commonly mistaken for daydreaming. This seizure type used to be called petit mal seizures.
Atonic seizures: Atonic means “without tone.” An atonic seizure means you’ve lost muscle control or your muscles are weak during your seizure. Parts of your body may droop or drop such as your eyelids or head, or you may fall to the ground during this short seizure (usually less than 15 seconds). This seizure type is sometimes called “drop seizure” or “drop attack.”
Tonic seizures: Tonic means “with tone.” A tonic seizure means your muscle tone has greatly increased. Your arms, legs, back or whole body may be tense or stiff, causing you to fall. You may be aware or have a small change in awareness during this short seizure (usually less than 20 seconds).
Clonic seizures: “Clonus” means fast, repeating stiffening and relaxing of a muscle (“jerking”). A clonic seizure happens when muscles continuously jerk for seconds to a minute or muscles stiffen followed by jerking for seconds up to two minutes.
Tonic-clonic seizures: This seizure type is a combination of muscle stiffness (tonic) and repeated, rhythmic muscle jerking (clonic). Healthcare providers may call this seizure a convulsion, and once called it a grand mal seizure. Tonic-clonic seizures are what most people think of when they hear the word “seizure.” You lose consciousness, fall to the ground, your muscles stiffen and jerk for one to five minutes. You may bite your tongue, drool and lose muscle control of bowels or bladder, making you poop or pee.
Myoclonic seizures: This seizure type causes brief, shock-like muscle jerks or twitches (“myo” means muscle, “clonus” means muscle jerking). Myoclonic seizures usually last only a couple of seconds.
As your healthcare provider learns more, your seizure type may change to focal or generalized onset seizure.

What are seizure triggers?
Seizure triggers are events or something that happens before the start of your seizure.

Commonly reported seizure triggers include:

Stress.
Sleep issues such as not sleeping well, not getting enough sleep, being overtired, disrupted sleep and sleep disorders like sleep apnea.
Alcohol use, alcohol withdrawal, recreational drug use.
Hormonal changes or menstrual hormonal changes.
Illness, fever.
Flashing lights or patterns.
Not eating healthy, balanced meals or drinking enough fluids; vitamin and mineral deficiencies, skipping meals.
Physical overexertion.
Specific foods (caffeine is a common trigger).
Dehydration.
Certain times of the day or night.
Use of certain medications. Diphenhydramine, an ingredient in cold, allergy and sleep over-the-counter products, is a reported trigger.
Missed anti-seizure medication doses.
How can I figure out my seizure triggers?
Some people discover that their seizures occur consistently during certain times of the day or around certain events or other factors. You may want to track your seizures — and the events around your seizures — to see if there’s a pattern.

In your seizure diary, note the time of day each seizure happened, the events or special circumstances happening around the time of the seizure and how you felt. If you suspect you’ve identified a trigger, track that trigger to find out if it’s really a trigger. For example, if you think caffeine is a seizure trigger, do you have a seizure after consuming every caffeinated food or beverage, after “x” number of caffeinated foods/beverages or at certain times of day after consuming caffeine? Caffeine may or may not be the trigger when thoroughly reviewed.

Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs and symptoms of epileptic seizures?
The main symptom of epilepsy is recurring seizures. Your symptoms, however, vary depending on the type of seizure you have.

Seizure signs and symptoms include:

Temporary loss of awareness or consciousness.
Uncontrolled muscle movements, muscle jerking, loss of muscle tone.
Blank stare or “staring into space” look.
Temporary confusion, slowed thinking, problems with talking and understanding.
Changes in hearing, vision, taste, smell, feelings of numbness or tingling.
Problems talking or understanding.
Upset stomach, waves of heat or cold, goosebumps.
Lip-smacking, chewing motion, rubbing hands, finger motions.
Psychic symptoms, including fear, dread, anxiety or déjà vu.
Faster heart rate and/or breathing.
Most people with epilepsy tend to have the same type of seizure, so have similar symptoms with each seizure.

What causes epilepsy?
Most of the time (in up to 70% of cases), the cause of seizures is not known. Known causes include:

Genetics. Some types of epilepsy (like juvenile myoclonic epilepsy and childhood absence epilepsy) are more likely to run in families (inherited). Researchers believe that although there’s some evidence that specific genes are involved, the genes only increase the risk of epilepsy, and other factors may be involved. There are certain epilepsies that result from abnormalities that affect how brain cells can communicate with each other and can lead to abnormal brain signals and seizures.
Mesial temporal sclerosis. This is a scar that forms in the inner part of your temporal lobe (part of your brain near your ear) that can give rise to focal seizures.
Head injuries. Head injuries can result from vehicular accidents, falls or any blow to the head.
Brain infections. Infections can include brain abscess, meningitis, encephalitis and neurocysticercosis.
Immune disorders. Conditions that cause your immune system to attack brain cells (also called autoimmune diseases) can lead to epilepsy.
Developmental disorders. Birth abnormalities affecting the brain are a frequent cause of epilepsy, particularly in people whose seizures aren’t controlled with anti-seizure medications. Some birth abnormalities known to cause epilepsy include focal cortical dysplasia, polymicrogyria and tuberous sclerosis. There’s a wide range of other brain malformations known to cause epilepsy.
Metabolic disorders. People with a metabolic condition (how your body obtains energy for normal functions) can have epilepsy. Your healthcare provider can detect many of these disorders through genetic tests.
Brain conditions and brain vessel abnormalities. Brain health issues that can cause epilepsy include brain tumors, strokes, dementia and abnormal blood vessels, such as arteriovenous malformations.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is epilepsy diagnosed?
Technically, if you experience two or more seizures that weren’t caused by a known medical condition — for example, from alcohol withdrawal or low blood sugar — you’re considered to have epilepsy. Before making a diagnosis, your healthcare provider (or epilepsy specialist) will perform a physical exam, take your medical history and may order blood work (to rule out other causes). They may ask about your symptoms during the seizure and conduct other tests, as well.

Your healthcare provider will ask you or your family member (who’s witnessed your seizure) if you experienced any of the following during a seizure:

Muscle jerks.
Muscle stiffness.
Loss of bowel or bladder control (you peed or pooped during the seizure).
Change in breathing.
Skin color turned pale.
Had a blank stare.
Lost consciousness.
Had problems talking or understanding what was said to you.
What tests will be done to diagnose this condition?
Tests include:

Electroencephalography (EEG): This test measures the electrical activity in your brain. Certain abnormal electrical patterns are related to seizures.
Brain scans: Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to look for such things as tumors, infections or blood vessel abnormalities.
Management and Treatment
How is epilepsy treated?
Treatments to control epilepsy include anti-seizure medications, special diets (usually in addition to anti-seizure medications) and surgery.

Anti-seizure medications
Anti-seizure medications can control seizures in about 60% to 70% of people with epilepsy. Anti-seizure medication treatment is individualized. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved more than 20 anti-seizure medications for treating epilepsy. Your healthcare provider may try one or more medications, doses of medications or a combination of medications to find what works best to control your seizures.

Choice of an anti-seizure medication depends on:

Seizure type.
Your prior response to anti-seizure medications.
Other medical conditions you have.
The potential for interaction with other medications you take.
Side effects of the anti-seizure drug (if any).
Your age
General health.
Cost.
Because some anti-seizure medications are linked to birth defects, let your healthcare provider know if you’re pregnant or planning to become pregnant.

If anti-seizure medications don’t control your seizures, your healthcare provider will discuss other treatment options, including special diets, medical devices or surgery.

Diet therapy
The ketogenic diet and the modified Atkins diet — diets high in fat, moderate in protein and low in carbohydrates — are the two most common diets sometimes recommended for people with epilepsy. Diets are mostly recommended for children where medication was not effective and who aren’t candidates for surgery. Low glycemic index diets may also reduce seizures in some people with epilepsy.

Surgery and devices
Your healthcare provider will consider surgery if anti-seizure medications don’t control your seizures, and if your seizures are severe and debilitating. Epilepsy surgery can be a safe and effective treatment option when more than two anti-seizure medication trials fail to control your seizures. It’s important to be evaluated at an epilepsy center to see if you’re a candidate for epilepsy surgery if anti-seizure medications don’t control your seizures.

Surgery options include surgical resection (removal of abnormal tissue), disconnection (cutting fiber bundles that connect areas of your brain), stereotactic radiosurgery (targeted destruction of abnormal brain tissue) or implantation of neuromodulation devices. These devices send electrical impulses to your brain to reduce seizures over time.

Outlook / Prognosis
Is there a cure for epilepsy?
There’s no cure for epilepsy. But there are many options to treat epilepsy.

Will I always have seizures?
About 70% of people become seizure-free with proper treatment within a few years. The remaining 30% are considered to have drug-resistant epilepsy. These people should go to an epilepsy center to determine if they’re candidates for epilepsy surgery.

How long will I have to take anti-epileptic medications?
It depends on the type of epilepsy you have and your response to medication. Some people who remain seizure-free for several years may be able to stop their medication. Your healthcare provider makes this decision. They’ll consider a variety of factors when making this decision, including an absence of brain lesions on your MRI, EEG findings and your medical history. Some people may require life-long medication.

Prevention
Can epilepsy be prevented?
Although many causes of epilepsy are out of your control and unpreventable, you can reduce your chance of developing a few conditions that might lead to epilepsy, such as:

To lower your risk of traumatic brain injury (from blows to your head), always wear your seatbelt when driving and drive “defensively”; wear a helmet when biking; clear your floors of clutter and power cords to prevent falls; and stay off ladders.
To lower your risk of stroke, eat a healthy diet (such as the Mediterranean diet), maintain a healthy weight and exercise regularly.
Seek therapy for substance abuse. Alcohol and other illegal drugs can damage your brain, which can then lead to epilepsy.

Cancer / Tumor-Related

Lung Cancer – increasing due to smoking & pollution

Lung cancer is a type of cancer that starts when abnormal cells grow in an uncontrolled way in the lungs. It is a serious health issue that can cause severe harm and death.

Symptoms of lung cancer include a cough that does not go away, chest pain and shortness of breath.

It is important to seek medical care early to avoid serious health effects. Treatments depend on the person’s medical history and the stage of the disease.

The most common types of lung cancer are non-small cell carcinoma (NSCLC) and small cell carcinoma (SCLC). NSCLC is more common and grows slowly, while SCLC is less common but often grows quickly.

Lung cancer is a significant public health concern, causing a considerable number of deaths globally. GLOBOCAN 2020 estimates of cancer incidence and mortality produced by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) show as lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer death, with an estimated 1.8 million deaths (18%) in 2020.

Smoking tobacco (including cigarettes, cigars, and pipes) is the primary risk factor for lung cancer but it can also affect non-smokers. Other risk factors include exposure to secondhand smoke, occupational hazards (such as asbestos, radon and certain chemicals), air pollution, hereditary cancer syndromes, and previous chronic lung diseases.

Symptoms
Lung cancer can cause several symptoms that may indicate a problem in the lungs.

The most common symptoms include:

cough that does not go away
chest pain
shortness of breath
coughing up blood (haemoptysis)
fatigue
weight loss with no known cause
lung infections that keep coming back.
Early symptoms may be mild or dismissed as common respiratory issues, leading to delayed diagnosis.

Prevention
Not smoking tobacco is the best way to prevent lung cancer.

Other risk factors to avoid include:

secondhand smoke
air pollution
workplace hazards like chemicals and asbestos.
Early treatment can prevent lung cancer from becoming worse and spreading to other parts of the body.

Prevention of lung cancer include primary and secondary prevention measures. Primary prevention aims to prevent the initial occurrence of a disease through risk reduction and promoting healthy behaviour. In public health, these preventive measures include smoking cessation, promoting smoke-free environments, implementing tobacco control policies, addressing occupational hazards, and reducing air pollution levels.

Secondary prevention for lung cancer involves screening methods that aim to detect the disease in its early stages, before symptoms become apparent and can be indicated for high-risk individuals. In this population, early detection can significantly increase the chances of successful treatment and improve outcomes. The primary screening method for lung cancer is low-dose computed tomography (LDCT).

Diagnosis
Diagnostic methods for lung cancer include physical examination, imaging (such as chest X-rays, computed tomography scans, and magnetic resonance imaging), examination of the inside of the lung using a bronchoscopy, taking a sample of tissue (biopsy) for histopathology examination and definition of the specific subtype (NSCLC versus SCLC), and molecular testing to identify specific genetic mutations or biomarkers to guide the best treatment option.

Treatment and care
Treatments for lung cancer are based on the type of cancer, how much it has spread, and the person’s medical history. Early detection of lung cancer can lead to better treatments and outcomes.

Treatments include:

surgery
radiotherapy (radiation)
chemotherapy
targeted therapy
immunotherapy.
Surgery is often used in the early stages of lung cancer if the tumour has not spread to other areas of the body. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy can help shrink the tumour.

Doctors from several disciplines often work together to provide treatment and care of people with lung cancer.

Supportive care is important for people with lung cancer. It aims to manage symptoms, provide pain relief, and give emotional support. It can help to increase quality of life for people with lung cancer and their families.

Stages of care
a) Early stage disease: The primary treatment for early stage lung cancer (i.e. tumour limited to the lung, with no metastatic dissemination to distant organs or lymph nodes) is surgical removal of the tumour through procedures such as lobectomy, segmentectomy, or wedge resection. Neoadjuvant therapy (chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy before surgery) can help reduce tumour size, making it more manageable for surgical removal. Adjuvant treatment (chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy) is very often recommended after surgery to reduce the risk of cancer recurrence. In cases where surgery is not feasible, radiation therapy or stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) may be used as the primary treatment. Targeted therapy and immunotherapy may also be considered based on specific tumour characteristics. Individualized treatment plans should be discussed with healthcare professionals.

b) Advanced disease: The treatment for metastatic stage lung cancer, where the cancer has spread to distant organs or lymph nodes, is based on various factors, including the patient's overall health, the extent and location of metastases, histology, genetic profile, and individual preferences. The primary goal is to prolong survival, alleviate symptoms, and improve quality of life. Systemic therapies, such as chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy, play a crucial role in the treatment of metastatic lung cancer.

Chemotherapy is often the first-line treatment for the majority of patients around the world and involves the use of drugs that circulate throughout the body to kill cancer cells. Combination chemotherapy regimens are commonly used, and the choice of drugs depends on factors such as the histological type of the cancer and the patient's general health conditions. Targeted therapy, designed to block the signalling pathways that drive the growth of cancer cells, is an important option for patients with specific genetic mutations or biomarkers identified in their tumour. Immunotherapy, specifically immune checkpoint inhibitors, has revolutionized the treatment of metastatic lung cancer. These drugs help to stimulate the immune system to recognize and attack cancer cells. Local treatments, such as radiation therapy and surgery, may be used to manage specific metastatic sites or alleviate symptoms caused by tumour growth.

Clinical Trials
Clinical trials offer opportunities to access novel treatments or experimental therapies for patients. Participation in clinical trials helps advance medical knowledge and potentially offers new treatment options.

Breast Cancer – highly prevalent in women

Breast cancer is a disease in which abnormal breast cells grow out of control and form tumours. If left unchecked, the tumours can spread throughout the body and become fatal.

Breast cancer cells begin inside the milk ducts and/or the milk-producing lobules of the breast. The earliest form (in situ) is not life-threatening and can be detected in early stages. Cancer cells can spread into nearby breast tissue (invasion). This creates tumours that cause lumps or thickening. 

Invasive cancers can spread to nearby lymph nodes or other organs (metastasize). Metastasis can be life-threatening and fatal.

Treatment is based on the person, the type of cancer and its spread. Treatment combines surgery, radiation therapy and medications.

Scope of the problem
In 2022, there were an estimated 2.3 million women diagnosed with breast cancer and 670 000 deaths globally. Breast cancer occurs in every country of the world in women at any age after puberty but with increasing rates in later life.  

Global estimates reveal striking inequities in the breast cancer burden according to human development. For instance, in countries with a very high Human Development Index (HDI), 1 in 12 women will be diagnosed with breast cancer in their lifetime and 1 in 71 women die of it.

In contrast, in countries with a low HDI; while only 1 in 27 women is diagnosed with breast cancer in their lifetime, 1 in 48 women will die from it.

Who is at risk?
Female gender is the strongest breast cancer risk factor. Approximately 99% of breast cancers occur in women and 0.5–1% of breast cancers occur in men. The treatment of breast cancer in men follows the same principles of management as for women.

Certain factors increase the risk of breast cancer including increasing age, obesity, harmful use of alcohol, family history of breast cancer, history of radiation exposure, reproductive history (such as age that menstrual periods began and age at first pregnancy), tobacco use and postmenopausal hormone therapy. Approximately half of breast cancers develop in women who have no identifiable breast cancer risk factor other than gender (female) and age (over 40 years). 

Family history of breast cancer increases the risk of breast cancer, but most women diagnosed with breast cancer do not have a known family history of the disease. However, lack of a known family history does not necessarily mean that a woman is at reduced risk.

Certain inherited high penetrance gene mutations greatly increase breast cancer risk, the most dominant being mutations in the genes BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB-2. Women found to have mutations in these major genes may consider risk reduction strategies such as surgical removal of both breasts and/or chemoprevention.

Mortality is reduced when breast cancer cases are detected and treated early. There are two components of early detection:

early diagnosis: being aware of signs and symptoms of breast cancer and the importance of seeking medical advice for abnormal findings, timely clinical evaluation and diagnosis and referral for treatment services; and
screening: the application of mammography in an apparently healthy population, usually women 50-69 years of age, to identify pre-clinical lesions before recognizable signs or symptoms appear.
Signs and symptoms

Most people will not experience any symptoms when the cancer is still early hence the importance of early detection.

Breast cancer can have combinations of symptoms, especially when it is more advanced. Symptoms of breast cancer can include:

a breast lump or thickening, often without pain 
change in size, shape or appearance of the breast
dimpling, redness, pitting or other changes in the skin
change in nipple appearance or the skin surrounding the nipple (areola) 
abnormal or bloody fluid from the nipple.
People with an abnormal breast lump should seek medical care, even if the lump does not hurt. 

Most breast lumps are not cancer. Breast lumps that are cancerous are more likely to be successfully treated when they are small and have not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

Breast cancers may spread to other areas of the body and trigger other symptoms. Often, the most common first detectable site of spread is to the lymph nodes under the arm although it is possible to have cancer-bearing lymph nodes that cannot be felt. 

Over time, cancerous cells may spread to other organs including the lungs, liver, brain and bones. Once they reach these sites, new cancer-related symptoms such as bone pain or headaches may appear. 

Management of breast cancer 
Treatment for breast cancer depends on the subtype of cancer and how much it has spread outside of the breast to lymph nodes (stages II or III) or to other parts of the body (stage IV).octors combine treatments to minimize the chances of the cancer coming back (recurrence). These include:

surgery to remove the breast tumour;
radiation therapy to reduce recurrence risk in the breast and surrounding tissues; and
medications to kill cancer cells and prevent spread, including hormonal therapies, chemotherapy or targeted biological therapies.
Treatments for breast cancer are more effective and are better tolerated when started early and taken to completion. The effectiveness of breast cancer therapies depends on completing the full course of treatment. Partial treatment is less likely to lead to a positive outcome.

Surgery may remove just the cancerous tissue (called a lumpectomy) or the whole breast (mastectomy). Lymph nodes are removed at the time of cancer surgery for invasive cancers. Complete removal of the lymph node bed under the arm (complete axillary dissection) was thought to be necessary in the past to prevent the spread of cancer. A smaller lymph node procedure called “sentinel node biopsy” is now preferred as it has fewer complications.

Radiation therapy treats residual microscopic cancers left behind in the breast tissue and/or lymph nodes and minimizes the chances of cancer recurring on the chest wall.

Advanced cancers can erode through the skin to cause open sores (ulceration) but are not necessarily painful. Women with breast wounds that do not heal should seek medical care to have a biopsy performed.

Medicines to treat breast cancers are selected based on the biological properties of the cancer as determined by special tests (tumour marker determination). The great majority of drugs used for breast cancer are already on the WHO Essential Medicines List (EML).

Medical treatments for breast cancers, which may be given before (“neoadjuvant”) or after (“adjuvant”) surgery, are based on the biological subtyping of the cancers. Certain subtypes of breast cancer, such as triple negative (those that do not express estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) or HER-2 receptor), are more aggressive than others.

Cancers that express the estrogen receptor (ER) and/or progesterone receptor (PR) are likely to respond to endocrine (hormone) therapies such as tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors. These medicines are taken orally for 5–10 years and reduce the chance of recurrence of these “hormone-positive” cancers by nearly half. Endocrine therapies can cause symptoms of menopause but are generally well tolerated.

Cancers that do not express ER or PR are “hormone receptor negative” and need to be treated with chemotherapy unless the cancer is very small. The chemotherapy regimens available today are very effective in reducing the chances of cancer spread or recurrence and are generally given as outpatient therapy, not requiring hospital admission in the absence of complications.

Breast cancers that independently overexpress a molecule called the HER-2/neu oncogene (HER-2 positive) are amenable to treatment with targeted biological agents such as trastuzumab. When targeted biological therapies are given, they are combined with chemotherapy to make them effective at killing cancer cells.

Radiotherapy plays a very important role in treating breast cancer. With early-stage breast cancers, radiation can prevent a woman having to undergo a mastectomy. With later stage cancers, radiotherapy can reduce cancer recurrence risk even when a mastectomy has been performed.

Early access to a multidisciplinary team that includes oncologists, radiologists, pathologists, dieticians/nutritionists, physical therapists, social workers, mental health, palliative care and rehabilitation teams both during and after completion of treatment helps improve outcomes. It also helps patients maintain or restore their functioning, independence and participation in meaningful life roles and community activities more quickly than might otherwise be the case.

Prehabilitation, including lifestyle-based interventions (exercise, diet and nutritional supplementation and psychological support) between diagnosis and treatment has proven effective in minimizing  complications related to the treatment.

Since the whole continuum of care is often complex, patient navigation helps streamline care pathways, improving health outcomes and patient satisfaction, and guiding individuals – especially in resource-limited or fragmented systems – through the cancer care continuum to ensure timely diagnosis and treatment completion. Benefits include increased screening rates, reduced hospital readmissions, better treatment understanding, and improved quality of life.

Global impact
Age-standardized breast cancer mortality in high-income countries dropped by 40% between the 1980s and 2020. Countries that have succeeded in reducing breast cancer mortality have been able to achieve an annual breast cancer mortality reduction of 2–4% per year. 
The strategies for improving breast cancer outcomes depend on fundamental health system strengthening to deliver the treatments that are already known to work. These are also important for the management of other cancers and other noncommunicable diseases (NCDs). 
The establishment of reliable referral pathways from primary care facilities to secondary hospitals to dedicated cancer centres is the same approach as is required for the management of cervical cancer, lung cancer, colorectal cancer and prostate cancer. To that end, breast cancer is a so-called index disease whereby pathways are created that can be followed for the management of other cancers. 

Colorectal Cancer – affecting digestive tract

Colorectal cancer is a type of cancer that affects the colon (large intestine) or rectum. It is one of the most common types of cancer worldwide. It can cause severe harm and death.

The risk of colorectal cancer increases with age. Most cases affect people over 50 years old.

Common symptoms include diarrhoea, constipation, blood in the stool, abdominal pain, unexplained weight loss, fatigue, and low iron levels.

Many people will not have symptoms in the early stages of the disease.

The risk of colorectal cancer can be reduced by eating a healthy diet, staying physically active, not smoking tobacco and limiting alcohol. Regular screenings are crucial for early detection.

Colon cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. In 2020, more than 1.9 million new cases of colorectal cancer and more than 930 000 deaths due to colorectal cancer were estimated to have occurred worldwide. Large geographical variations in incidence and mortality rates were observed. The incidence rates were highest in Europe and Australia and New Zealand, and the mortality rates were highest in Eastern Europe. By 2040 the burden of colorectal cancer will increase to 3.2 million new cases per year (an increase of 63%) and 1.6 million deaths per year (an increase of 73%).

Incidence rates of colorectal cancer have been decreasing in high-income countries, largely as a result of effective screening programmes. The prognosis for colorectal cancer varies depending on the stage at diagnosis. Early-stage cancers have higher survival rates than advanced-stage cancers. Timely diagnosis, appropriate treatment, and regular follow-up care are important for improving survival rates and quality of life.

Risk Factors
Factors that may increase the risk of developing colorectal cancer include:

age: the risk of developing colorectal cancer increases with age, with most cases occurring in individuals over 50 years old;
family history: a family history of colorectal cancer or certain genetic conditions, such as Lynch syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), can increase the risk;
personal history: individuals who have had colorectal cancer before or certain types of polyps are at a higher risk; and
lifestyle factors: unhealthy lifestyle choices, such as a diet high in processed meats and low in fruits and vegetables, sedentary behaviour, obesity, smoking and excessive alcohol consumption, can increase the risk.
Symptoms
Colorectal cancer often has no symptoms in the early stages. Regular screenings are important to catch the disease early and begin treatment.

Common symptoms include:

changes in bowel habits such as diarrhoea, constipation, or narrowing of the stool
blood in the stool (rectal bleeding), either bright red or dark and tar-like
abdominal cramps, pain or bloating that won’t go away
unexplained weight loss that is sudden and losing weight without trying
feeling constantly tired and lacking energy, even with enough rest
iron deficiency anaemia due to chronic bleeding, causing fatigue, weakness and paleness.
Prevention
Lifestyle changes and regular screening can help prevent colorectal cancer.

Lifestyle changes to help prevent colorectal cancer include:

eating a healthy diet rich in fruits and vegetables
not smoking tobacco
keeping an active lifestyle
limiting alcohol consumption
avoiding exposure to environmental risk factors.
People who suspect they may have colorectal cancer should speak to their healthcare provider right away.

Regular screening for colorectal cancer (secondary prevention) is the best way to catch the disease early.

Treatments are more likely to cure the disease in the early stages.

Studies have shown that screening can reduce both the incidence and mortality of colorectal cancer through early detection and removal of precancerous growths.

Stool-based tests are non-invasive screening methods used to detect the presence of colorectal cancer or precancerous polyps in the stool. The common type of stool-based tests is the fecal occult blood test (FOBT). FOBT detects hidden blood in the stool, which can be an indicator of colorectal cancer or polyps. It involves collecting a small sample of stool and sending it to a laboratory for analysis. If blood or abnormal findings are detected in the stool, further diagnostic procedures, such as colonoscopy, are usually recommended to confirm the presence of colorectal cancer or polyps.

Stool-based tests are convenient, non-invasive, and can be effective in detecting colorectal cancer at early stages or identifying precancerous polyps.

Individuals with a family history of colorectal cancer or certain genetic conditions may benefit from genetic counselling and genetic testing to assess their risk and determine appropriate screening measures.

Diagnosis
Diagnostic methods for colorectal cancer include physical examination, imaging (such as abdominal ultrasound, computed tomography scans, and magnetic resonance imaging), examination of the inside of the colon using colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy, taking a sample of tissue (biopsy) for histopathology examination, and molecular testing to identify specific genetic mutations or biomarkers to guide the best treatment option.

Treatment and care
Treatments for colorectal cancer are based on the type and progression of the cancer and the person’s medical history. Early detection of colorectal cancer can lead to better treatments and outcomes.

Treatments include:

surgery
radiotherapy (radiation)
chemotherapy
targeted therapy
immunotherapy.
Surgery is often used in the early stages of cancer if the tumour has not spread to other areas of the body. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy can help shrink the tumour.

Doctors from several disciplines often work together to provide treatment and care of people with colorectal cancer.

Supportive care is important for people with colorectal cancer. It aims to manage symptoms, provide pain relief, and give emotional support. It can help to increase quality of life for people with colorectal cancer and their families.

Stages of care
a) Early stage disease. The primary treatment for early stage colorectal cancer (i.e. tumour limited to the bowel or local lymph nodes, with no metastatic dissemination to distant organs) is surgical removal of the tumour and nearby lymph nodes. The specific surgical procedure depends on the location of the tumour. It may involve a colectomy (removal of a portion of the colon) or a proctectomy (removal of the rectum). In some cases, a temporary or permanent colostomy or ileostomy may be needed to create an opening for waste elimination. Adjuvant therapy refers to additional treatment given after surgery to lower the risk of cancer recurrence. In early-stage colorectal cancer, adjuvant chemotherapy may be recommended to kill any remaining cancer cells that cannot be seen or removed during surgery. Adjuvant chemotherapy is typically recommended for patients with a higher risk of recurrence, such as those with lymph node involvement or certain tumour characteristics. Sometimes chemotherapy may be given before surgery (neoadjuvant chemotherapy) to shrink the tumour. Radiation therapy can be associated in tumours of the last segment of the intestine (rectum) to increase the chance of reduce the size of the tumour.

After treatment, regular follow-up visits and surveillance are essential to monitor for any signs of recurrence or new cancer. Surveillance may include physical examinations, blood tests, and imaging studies (such as CT scans) to detect any potential recurrence at an early stage.

a) Advanced disease. Systemic therapy is the primary treatment approach for metastatic colorectal cancer, as it aims to treat cancer cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy is often used as the first-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer. Combination chemotherapy regimens are commonly used to kill cancer cells or slow down their growth. Targeted therapy may be used in combination with chemotherapy for patients with specific genetic mutations, such as KRAS or BRAF mutations. Immunotherapy drugs may be considered for patients with tumours that exhibit specific genetic markers, such as microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) or mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR).

In some cases, surgery may be recommended for metastatic colorectal cancer to remove tumours that are causing symptoms or blocking the intestine. Localized treatments, such as radiofrequency ablation, cryoablation, or radiation therapy, may be used to treat specific areas of metastasis, such as liver metastases. Radiation therapy may be used to help control the disease and manage symptoms, such as pain or bleeding.

Clinical Trials
Clinical trials offer opportunities to access novel treatments or experimental therapies for patients. Participation in clinical trials helps advance medical knowledge and potentially offers new treatment options.

Prostate Cancer – common in men

Prostate cancer is a significant health concern for men worldwide, with increasing incidence in both developing and developed countries. While it most commonly affects men over the age of 50, cases are now being reported in younger age groups as well, especially those between 35 and 55 years. Early detection plays a critical role in improving treatment outcomes and preserving quality of life.

Many men may have heard of the prostate gland, PSA (Prostate-Specific Antigen) tests, or cancer screenings, but may not fully understand their importance until symptoms appear. By recognizing the early signs of prostate cancer and understanding the risk factors, men can take proactive steps to safeguard their health.

What is Prostate Cancer?
Prostate cancer is a type of cancer that forms in the tissues of the prostate gland—a small, walnut-shaped organ located just below the bladder in men. The prostate is part of the male reproductive system and is responsible for producing seminal fluid, which nourishes and helps transport sperm.

Most prostate cancers are adenocarcinomas, which develop slowly. In many cases, prostate cancer may remain confined to the gland for years without causing noticeable symptoms. However, in some men, the disease may grow aggressively and spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body if left undiagnosed.

Prostate cancer often begins with changes in the gland’s cells that may go unnoticed for years. Early prostate cancer usually does not present symptoms, which makes routine screening essential for timely detection.

Understanding the Prostate Gland
The prostate gland is part of the male reproductive system and is located below the bladder and in front of the rectum. It surrounds the urethra—the tube through which urine and semen exit the body.

Key functions of the prostate include:

Producing seminal fluid that supports and transports sperm
Aiding ejaculation by contracting and pushing semen into the urethra
Secreting prostate-specific antigen (PSA), a protein that helps keep semen in a liquid state
Since the urethra passes through the prostate, any enlargement or abnormality in the gland—whether benign or cancerous—can affect the flow of urine. This is why symptoms such as difficulty urinating or increased frequency are commonly associated with prostate issues.

Types of Prostate Cancer
Prostate cancer is classified based on the type of cells where the cancer originates. The majority of cases involve the glandular cells of the prostate, but a few rare forms also exist.

1. Adenocarcinoma
This is the most common type of prostate cancer, accounting for over 95% of cases. It begins in the gland cells of the prostate that produce seminal fluid. Adenocarcinomas typically grow slowly, but some forms may be aggressive.

2. Rare Types of Prostate Cancer
Although uncommon, prostate cancer can also develop from non-glandular cells within or near the prostate. These include:

Small Cell Carcinoma (a type of neuroendocrine tumor): Aggressive and fast-growing, often diagnosed at a more advanced stage
Other Neuroendocrine Tumors: Includes large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma
Transitional Cell Carcinoma: Typically starts in the bladder and may spread to the prostate
Sarcomas: Originate in the soft tissues or connective tissues of the prostate
These rare subtypes tend to be more aggressive and require specialized treatment approaches.

Most individuals diagnosed with prostate cancer are found to have adenocarcinoma, while the rarer types represent a small fraction of overall cases.

Stages of Prostate Cancer
Prostate cancer is staged based on how much the cancer has grown within the prostate and whether it has spread to surrounding or distant tissues. This staging helps determine treatment options and prognosis.

Stage 1: Very Early-Stage Prostate Cancer
Cancer is confined to a small area within the prostate.
It is often not causing symptoms and may be detected through routine PSA screening or biopsy.
The tumor is usually not palpable on a digital rectal exam.
Stage 2: Localized but Larger Tumor
The cancer remains within the prostate but is larger and may involve both lobes.
May be detectable during physical exam or imaging but has not spread beyond the prostate.
Stage 3: Locally Advanced Cancer
Cancer has grown beyond the prostate capsule and may have spread to nearby tissues, such as the seminal vesicles.
This stage indicates a higher risk of progression and may require a combination of treatment approaches.
Stage 4: Advanced or Metastatic Prostate Cancer
Cancer has spread to nearby organs (like the bladder or rectum), lymph nodes, or distant organs such as the bones or lungs.
This stage is often associated with more serious complications and systemic symptoms such as fatigue, bone pain, or weight loss.
Clarification: Is There a Stage 5?
There is no official Stage 5 in prostate cancer staging. Stage 4 is the most advanced stage, and any further classification is based on specific metastasis sites or treatment response.

Summary: Early vs. Late-Stage Prostate Cancer
Stage	Description	Typical Treatment Options
Stage 1 & 2 (Early-stage)	Confined to the prostate	Active surveillance, surgery, or radiation
Stage 3	Spread to nearby tissues	Surgery, radiation, hormone therapy
Stage 4 (Advanced-stage)	Spread to distant organs	Hormone therapy, chemotherapy, targeted therapy, palliative care
 

Symptoms of Prostate Cancer
Prostate cancer often develops silently in its early stages and may not produce noticeable symptoms for years. This is why routine screening is crucial, especially for men over 50 or those at higher risk. When symptoms do occur, they are often related to urinary or reproductive function, due to the prostate’s location around the urethra.

Early-Stage Symptoms
In the early stages, prostate cancer symptoms may be subtle or mistaken for benign conditions such as Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH) or prostatitis. Common signs include:

Frequent urination, especially at night
Difficulty starting or stopping urination
Weak or interrupted urinary stream
Burning or painful sensation while urinating
Painful ejaculation
Erectile dysfunction
Blood in the urine (hematuria) or blood in semen (hematospermia)
Feeling of incomplete bladder emptying
Urine leakage while coughing, sneezing, or laughing
These symptoms are not exclusive to prostate cancer and may also occur with non-cancerous prostate conditions, but they warrant evaluation by a healthcare provider.

Advanced-Stage Symptoms
As prostate cancer progresses, it can spread to nearby tissues, lymph nodes, and bones. Symptoms of advanced prostate cancer may include:

Persistent pain or stiffness in the pelvic region, lower back, hips, ribs, or upper thighs
Swelling in the legs or pelvic area due to lymphatic obstruction
Unexplained weight loss and fatigue
Numbness, weakness, or even paralysis in the lower limbs (if cancer spreads to the spine)
Loss of bladder or bowel control in extreme cases
Are These Symptoms Definitive for Prostate Cancer?
Not necessarily. Several conditions, such as BPH and prostatitis, can mimic the symptoms of prostate cancer. These are non-cancerous and more common in younger men. However, any persistent urinary, sexual, or pelvic symptoms should be evaluated by a urologist to rule out cancer and ensure early intervention if needed.

Causes of Prostate Cancer
The exact cause of prostate cancer remains unclear, but it begins when the cells in the prostate gland undergo abnormal changes—typically at the genetic level. These changes cause the cells to grow uncontrollably, live longer than normal, and eventually form a tumor.

Genetic Mutations and Cell Abnormalities
At the core of most prostate cancers are mutations in the DNA of prostate cells. These mutations may:

Trigger uncontrolled cell division
Prevent normal cell death
Promote abnormal protein production that fuels tumor growth
Enable cancer cells to invade nearby tissue or spread (metastasize) to distant parts of the body
Some prostate cancers remain slow-growing and may never cause significant harm, while others are aggressive and fast-spreading.

Contributing Factors
While the mutations themselves are often spontaneous, certain underlying factors may contribute to or increase the chance of these genetic changes, including:

Inherited genetic mutations (e.g., BRCA1, BRCA2, or genes linked to Lynch syndrome)
Long-term exposure to toxins, such as cigarette smoke or environmental chemicals
Oxidative stress and chronic inflammation in the prostate
Lifestyle choices such as smoking and heavy alcohol use may also play a role by introducing carcinogens into the body that can damage cellular DNA over time.

How Prostate Cancer Spreads in the Body
Prostate cancer typically starts in the gland cells of the prostate, but in some cases, it can spread beyond the prostate. This process is called metastasis and it significantly affects treatment options and outcomes.

1. Lymphatic Spread
Cancer cells can break away from the primary tumor and travel through the lymphatic system, reaching nearby lymph nodes. Once inside the lymph system, cancer cells can circulate and form new tumors in distant nodes or organs.

2. Hematogenous (Bloodstream) Spread
Cancer cells can enter the bloodstream, allowing them to reach distant parts of the body such as the bones, lungs, or liver. Bone metastasis is one of the most common complications of advanced prostate cancer, often causing pain or fractures.

3. Local Invasion
Prostate cancer can also spread by direct invasion into surrounding tissues, such as the seminal vesicles, bladder, or rectum. In some cases, this may lead to urinary obstruction or rectal discomfort.

4. Urinary Tract Involvement
In rare instances, cancer cells may enter the urethra or bladder, potentially causing urinary symptoms such as blockage or blood in urine.

Risk Factors for Prostate Cancer
While having one or more risk factors does not guarantee that you will develop prostate cancer, certain factors are known to increase your likelihood of getting the disease. Understanding these risk factors can help with early screening and informed decision-making.

1. Age
Age is the strongest risk factor. Prostate cancer is rare in men under 50 but becomes increasingly common as men age.
More than 60% of prostate cancer cases occur in men aged 65 and older.
2. Family History & Genetics
Having a first-degree relative (father, brother, or son) with prostate cancer doubles or triples your risk.
The risk increases further if multiple relatives are affected or if they were diagnosed at a young age.
A family history of breast or ovarian cancer may also increase your risk, especially with known BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations or Lynch syndrome.
3. Race and Ethnicity
Black men have the highest risk of developing prostate cancer and are more likely to develop aggressive forms of the disease.
Asian men tend to have lower rates of prostate cancer, though rates are rising globally due to lifestyle and environmental changes.
The exact reasons for racial disparities are still being studied.
4. Diet and Nutrition
Diets high in red meat, processed meats, and high-fat dairy products, with low intake of fruits and vegetables, are linked to increased risk.
Deficiencies in nutrients like vitamin E, selenium, and omega-3 fatty acids may also contribute.
A balanced, plant-rich diet may help lower risk.
5. Obesity
Obese men are more likely to develop aggressive and advanced-stage prostate cancer.
Obesity may cause hormonal imbalances and chronic inflammation, both of which can fuel cancer development.
6. Smoking and Lifestyle
Smoking has been associated with an increased risk of aggressive prostate cancer and poorer outcomes.
Sedentary lifestyle and poor physical activity levels may also contribute.
7. Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs)
STIs such as chlamydia or gonorrhea may cause inflammation of the prostate, potentially increasing cancer risk. However, this link is not yet fully established.
8. Environmental Exposure
Long-term exposure to environmental toxins like cadmium, asbestos, and pesticides may increase risk, particularly in occupational settings.
Geographic variations in incidence rates are observed globally, but these are likely due to differences in diet, healthcare access, and screening awareness.
Complications of Prostate Cancer
Prostate cancer can lead to several physical and functional complications, both from the disease itself and its treatment. These complications vary depending on the stage of cancer, its rate of progression, and the type of treatment received.

1. Erectile Dysfunction
Prostate cancer or its treatments—such as surgery, radiation therapy, or hormone therapy—can damage the nerves and blood vessels responsible for erections. While erectile dysfunction may be temporary in some cases, others may require long-term solutions like medications, vacuum devices, or penile implants.

2. Urinary Incontinence
The prostate surrounds the urethra, and both the cancer and its treatment can affect bladder control. Some men may experience:

Urinary leakage during coughing or exertion (stress incontinence)
Sudden urge to urinate (urge incontinence)
Continuous dribbling or difficulty emptying the bladder
Management options include medications, pelvic floor therapy, catheters, or surgical procedures.

3. Infertility
Treatments such as prostatectomy or radiation can impact semen production and ejaculatory function, reducing or eliminating the ability to conceive naturally. Men concerned about fertility may opt for sperm banking before treatment.

4. Cancer Metastasis (Spread)
Advanced prostate cancer can spread beyond the prostate to nearby lymph nodes, bones, or distant organs such as the liver or lungs. This is called metastasis and can lead to complications like:

Chronic bone pain
Fractures
Neurological issues if the spine is involved
Metastatic prostate cancer is not typically curable but can be managed with appropriate therapies to extend life and improve quality of life.
Diagnosis of Prostate Cancer
Early and accurate diagnosis of prostate cancer significantly improves treatment outcomes. Since prostate cancer often develops slowly and may not show symptoms in its early stages, screening plays a vital role, particularly in men over 50 or those at higher risk.

Screening Tests
PSA (Prostate-Specific Antigen) Blood Test
This is the most common initial screening tool. PSA is a protein produced by both normal and cancerous prostate tissue. Elevated levels may suggest cancer, but can also be caused by benign conditions like Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH) or prostatitis.
If PSA levels are high, the test may be repeated to confirm results.
A Free PSA test may also be used. A low free PSA percentage suggests a higher risk of cancer.
Digital Rectal Examination (DRE)
A doctor manually checks the prostate by inserting a gloved, lubricated finger into the rectum to feel for abnormal growths or nodules.
Transrectal Ultrasound (TRUS)
Uses sound waves to create images of the prostate. It is often used to guide biopsies.
Prostate MRI (Multiparametric MRI)
This advanced imaging helps identify suspicious areas within the prostate and assess cancer spread, using a PIRADS score to grade risk.
Confirmatory Diagnostic Tests
If screening tests suggest the possibility of cancer, further investigations are conducted:

Prostate Biopsy
A TRUS-guided biopsy is typically done where small tissue samples are taken from multiple regions of the prostate.
A positive biopsy confirms prostate cancer.
The tissue is graded using the Gleason score, which helps predict how likely the tumor is to grow or spread.
Gleason Grading System
Pathologists assess cancer cells under a microscope and assign a score from 2 to 10 based on patterns of cell abnormality:
Grade 1 (≤6): Well-differentiated, less aggressive
Grade 2 (7): Moderately aggressive
Grade 3 (8–10): Poorly differentiated and aggressive
Additional Imaging to Determine Cancer Stage
If cancer is confirmed, imaging tests may be used to assess the extent of spread (metastasis):

CT (Computed Tomography) scan – to check pelvic lymph nodes and nearby organs
Bone Scan – to detect spread to bones, especially in cases with bone pain or high PSA
PET scan – used when detailed information about spread is required
Ultrasound KUB – evaluates kidney, bladder, and prostate status
When Should You Get Screened?
Routine screening is advised for:

Men aged 50 and above
Men with a family history of prostate cancer
Individuals with certain genetic risk factors (e.g., BRCA mutations, Lynch syndrome)
Men of African descent (who have a higher risk)
Individuals with obesity, as they may develop more aggressive forms
Discussing screening options with a urologist is essential to balance the benefits of early detection with the risks of overdiagnosis.

Treatment for Prostate Cancer
The treatment of prostate cancer depends on multiple factors, including the stage of the disease, Gleason score, PSA levels, patient’s age, overall health, and whether the cancer is localized or has spread. Treatment aims to either cure the cancer or manage it effectively to enhance the patient’s quality of life.

1. Active Surveillance (Watchful Waiting)
For patients with early-stage, slow-growing prostate cancer, especially in older adults, immediate treatment may not be necessary. Instead, doctors may recommend careful monitoring through:

PSA blood tests
Digital Rectal Examinations (DRE)
Periodic biopsies and imaging
This approach avoids overtreatment in cases where the cancer may never progress or cause symptoms.

2. Curative Treatment Options
When prostate cancer is confined to the gland or diagnosed early, curative treatments may be advised.

a. Surgery – Radical Prostatectomy
Surgical removal of the prostate gland and sometimes surrounding tissue or lymph nodes. Options include:

Open Radical Prostatectomy
Laparoscopic Prostatectomy
Robot-Assisted Laparoscopic Prostatectomy
(Minimally invasive, faster recovery, less blood loss)
b. Radiation Therapy
Radiation uses high-energy rays to kill cancer cells. Common types include:

External Beam Radiation Therapy (EBRT)
Intensity-Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT)
Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy (SBRT)
Brachytherapy (Internal Radiation using radioactive seeds)
c. Proton Beam Therapy (See Section 3)
A newer, more precise type of radiation that minimizes damage to surrounding tissues like the bladder and rectum. Detailed separately below.

3. Proton Therapy for Prostate Cancer at Apollo Hospitals
Apollo Hospitals is home to Asia’s first and only Proton Therapy Centre, Apollo Proton Cancer Centre, Chennai.

Proton therapy uses proton particles instead of traditional X-rays to deliver radiation directly to the tumor. This method deposits most of its energy at the tumor site, sparing healthy tissues around the prostate.

Why Proton Therapy?
Unmatched Precision – Ideal for tumors close to vital organs
Minimal Side Effects – Lower risk of urinary incontinence, bowel dysfunction, and sexual side effects
High-Quality of Life – Especially for patients with localized or recurrent cancer
Outpatient Convenience – No hospital stay needed in most cases
Who Can Benefit?

Early-stage prostate cancer
Patients with high-risk or recurrent disease
Men who are unfit for surgery or wish to avoid it
Apollo Proton Cancer Centre, Chennai, offers this breakthrough technology with global expertise and personalized care. If you’re considering treatment options, consult with our proton therapy team to see if you're eligible.

4. Hormone Therapy (Androgen Deprivation Therapy – ADT)
This therapy aims to reduce the levels or effects of testosterone, which fuels prostate cancer growth.

Medications – To block testosterone production or action
Surgical removal of testicles (Orchiectomy) – A permanent hormone-blocking option
Used in:

Advanced or metastatic cancer
As a preparatory step before radiation
When surgery isn’t feasible
5. Chemotherapy
Used for advanced prostate cancer that has spread beyond the gland or doesn’t respond to hormone therapy.

Administered orally or intravenously
Helps shrink tumors and slow progression
Side effects: fatigue, hair loss, nausea, appetite loss
6. Immunotherapy
Boosts the body’s immune system to fight cancer.

Sipuleucel-T (Provenge) – A personalized treatment designed for advanced cases
Side effects: flu-like symptoms, mild fatigue, or nausea
7. Cryotherapy (Cryoablation)
Involves freezing prostate tissue using liquid nitrogen to destroy cancer cells. It’s a minimally invasive option suitable for:

Early-stage cancers
Recurrent cases after radiation
8. Targeted Therapy
This involves drugs that specifically target molecular changes in cancer cells. Still under research for prostate cancer, targeted therapy may be used in selected cases with identifiable genetic mutations.

9. Palliative Care for Advanced Prostate Cancer
For stage 4 or metastatic prostate cancer, the focus shifts to:

Managing symptoms
Slowing disease progression
Improving comfort and quality of life
Palliative treatments may include:

Hormone therapy
Low-dose radiation for bone pain
Supportive medications for fatigue, urinary issues, and pain
Final Note - With early diagnosis and access to cutting-edge treatments like robotic surgery, proton therapy, and personalized immunotherapy, prostate cancer is among the most treatable cancers. Every case is different, and your treatment should be personalized by a urologist or oncology expert.

Recurrent Prostate Cancer
Recurrent prostate cancer refers to cancer that returns after initial treatment. It can reappear in the prostate region (local recurrence) or spread to other parts of the body (distant recurrence), such as the bones, liver, lungs, or lymph nodes.

Common Signs of Recurrence:
Rising PSA levels – often the earliest and most reliable sign
Blood in the urine
Difficulty urinating or new urinary obstruction
Persistent lower back or pelvic pain
Fatigue or weakness
Shortness of breath (if lungs are affected)
Jaundice (if the liver is involved)
Monitoring After Treatment
After primary treatment (surgery, radiation, etc.), regular PSA tests, imaging scans, and clinical check-ups are essential for early detection of recurrence. Early intervention may help manage recurrence effectively and improve quality of life.

When to Consult a Doctor About Prostate Cancer
If you notice persistent symptoms such as frequent urination, difficulty urinating, blood in the urine or semen, pelvic discomfort, or erectile dysfunction, it is important to consult a doctor. These could be early warning signs of prostate cancer or other prostate-related conditions.

You should see a urologist or oncologist for further evaluation and screening, especially if:

You are over the age of 50
You have a family history of prostate or breast cancer
Your symptoms are gradually worsening
You have previously elevated PSA levels or abnormal test results
Early diagnosis is key to effective treatment. If caught in its early stages, prostate cancer is one of the most treatable cancers. Don’t delay medical attention if symptoms persist or raise concern.

Book an appointment with Oncologist
Prevention of Prostate Cancer
While there is no guaranteed way to prevent prostate cancer, certain lifestyle changes may help lower your risk and support overall prostate health:

Maintain a healthy diet: Focus on a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and healthy fats. Reduce intake of red meat, processed foods, and high-fat dairy products.
Exercise regularly: Physical activity can help maintain a healthy weight and improve immune function, both of which are linked to a lower risk of prostate cancer.
Maintain a healthy weight: Obesity is associated with a higher risk of aggressive prostate cancer. Aim for a healthy body mass index (BMI).
Limit smoking and alcohol consumption: Avoiding tobacco and reducing alcohol intake may help improve overall health and lower cancer risk.
Stay informed about your family history: If prostate or breast cancer runs in your family, speak with your doctor about earlier or more frequent screenings.
Get regular checkups: Talk to your doctor about prostate health, especially after the age of 50 or earlier if you're in a high-risk group.
Manage stress: Long-term stress may negatively affect overall health; incorporating relaxation techniques such as meditation, yoga, or hobbies can be beneficial.
Although you can't eliminate the risk completely, these proactive steps can help reduce your chances of developing prostate cancer and support better health outcomes if diagnosed early.

Outlook and Final Thoughts
Prostate cancer, when detected early, is highly treatable. If diagnosed before it spreads beyond the prostate, the 5-year survival rate can be as high as 99%. However, once metastasized to distant organs, the survival rate drops significantly, to around 29%. This makes early diagnosis and timely treatment absolutely vital.

Men over 45, especially those with risk factors like family history or certain genetic traits, should speak to their doctor about regular screening options such as PSA tests and digital rectal exams. Early intervention not only improves survival but also reduces complications and preserves quality of life.

Skin Cancer (Melanoma) – rising due to UV exposure

What are the different types of skin cancer?

Non-melanoma skin cancers

Non-melanoma skin cancers comprise basal cell carcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas. These are rarely lethal but surgical treatment is painful and often disfiguring. The temporal trends of the incidence of non-melanoma skin cancers are difficult to determine, because reliable registration of these cancers has not been achieved. However, specific studies carried out in Australia, Canada and the United States, indicate that between the 1960s and the 1980s the prevalence of non-melanoma skin cancers increased by a factor of more than two.

The risk of non-melanoma skin cancers has been examined with respect to personal exposure, and the following conclusions can be drawn:

Non-melanoma skin cancers are most frequent on parts of the body that are commonly exposed to the sun such as ears, face, neck and forearms. This implies that long-term, repeated UV radiation exposure is a major causal factor.
Within some countries there is a clear relationship between increasing incidence of non-melanoma skin cancers with decreasing latitude, i.e. higher UV radiation levels.
Malignant melanoma

Malignant melanoma, although far less prevalent than non-melanoma skin cancers, is the major cause of death from skin cancer and is more likely to be reported and accurately diagnosed than non-melanoma skin cancers. Since the early 1970s, malignant melanoma incidence has increased significantly, for example an average 4 per cent every year in the United States. A large number of studies indicate that the risk of malignant melanoma correlates with genetic and personal characteristics, and a person’s UV exposure behaviour. The following is a summary of the main human risk factors:

A large number of atypical nevi (moles) is the strongest risk factor for malignant melanoma in fair-skinned populations.
Malignant melanoma is more common among people with a pale complexion, blue eyes, and red or fair hair. Experimental studies have demonstrated a lower minimum erythema dose and more prolonged erythema in melanoma patients than in controls.
High, intermittent exposure to solar UV appears to be a significant risk factor for the development of malignant melanoma.
The incidence of malignant melanoma in white populations generally increases with decreasing latitude, with the highest recorded incidence occurring in Australia, where the annual rates are 10 and over 20 times the rates in Europe for women and men respectively.
Several epidemiological studies support a positive association with history of sunburn, particularly sunburn at an early age.
The role of cumulative sun exposure in the development of malignant melanoma is equivocal. However, malignant melanoma risk is higher in people with a history of non-melanoma skin cancers and of solar keratoses, both of which are indicators of cumulative UV exposure.
How common is skin cancer?

The incidence of both non-melanoma and melanoma skin cancers has been increasing over the past decades. Currently, between 2 and 3 million non-melanoma skin cancers and 132,000 melanoma skin cancers occur globally each year. One in every three cancers diagnosed is a skin cancer and, according to Skin Cancer Foundation Statistics, one in every five Americans will develop skin cancer in their lifetime.

As ozone levels are depleted, the atmosphere loses more and more of its protective filter function and more solar UV radiation reaches the Earth's surface. It is estimated that a 10 per cent decrease in ozone levels will result in an additional 300,000 non-melanoma and 4,500 melanoma skin cancer cases. The global incidence of melanoma continues to increase – however, the main factors that predispose to the development of melanoma seem to be connected with recreational exposure to the sun and a history of sunburn. These factors lie within each individual's own responsibility.

Who is most at risk of getting skin cancer?

Due to their relative lack of skin pigmentation Caucasian populations generally have a much higher risk of getting non-melanoma or melanoma skin cancers than dark-skinned populations. Naturally brown and black people (skin types V, VI – see table) can usually safely tolerate relatively high levels of sun exposure without getting sunburnt or greatly increasing their skin cancer risk. In contrast, people with pale or freckled skin, fair or red hair and blue eyes belong to the highest risk group (skin types I, II); people with dark hair and eyes who do not normally get sunburnt are at medium risk of developing skin cancer (skin types III, IV). Nevertheless excessive exposure to intense sunlight can damage all skin types - the risk of eye damage and heat stroke is the same for everyone!

Some individual risk factors for skin cancer

fair skin
blue, green or hazel eyes
light-coloured hair
tendency to burn rather than suntan
history of severe sunburns
many moles
freckles
a family history of skin cancer
Skin type classification	Do you burn in the sun?	Do you tan after having been in the sun?
I	Always	Seldom
II	Usually	Sometimes
III	Sometimes	Usually
IV	Seldom	Always
V	Naturally brown skin
VI	Naturally black skin



Stomach Cancer (Gastric Cancer) – linked to diet & infection


Stomach cancer, also known as gastric cancer, is a serious and potentially life-threatening disease that affects the cells lining the stomach. It is one of the most common types of cancer worldwide, with a higher incidence in certain regions and populations. To understand stomach cancer, it is important to have an overview of its characteristics and risk factors. 

Stomach Cancer

If you suspect you or someone else is experiencing Stomach cancer, it is crucial to seek immediate medical attention by calling emergency services or consult with a Cancer Specialist.

Causes of Gastric (Stomach) Cancer
Helicobacter pylori Infection: The bacterium Helicobacter pylori is one of the leading causes of stomach cancer. This infection can cause chronic inflammation in the stomach lining, leading to ulcers and changes that increase the risk of cancer. Long-term infection with H. pylori is a known risk factor for gastric cancer.

Dietary Factors: A diet high in salty, smoked, or pickled foods, and low in fruits and vegetables, can increase the risk of developing gastric cancer. The consumption of processed meats and food with high levels of nitrates is also linked to an elevated risk. Additionally, a low intake of antioxidants like vitamin C can make the stomach lining more susceptible to cancer-causing substances.

Family History and Genetics: A family history of gastric cancer increases an individual's risk. Inherited genetic mutations can play a role in predisposing individuals to stomach cancer. Conditions such as hereditary diffuse gastric cancer syndrome, caused by mutations in the CDH1 gene, can significantly increase the risk.

Age and Gender: Gastric cancer is more common in individuals over the age of 50, with men being more likely to develop the disease than women. As people age, their risk of stomach cancer increases, likely due to the accumulation of genetic mutations over time.

Smoking: Smoking is a well-established risk factor for many cancers, including gastric cancer. The chemicals in tobacco can damage the stomach lining, leading to an increased risk of cancer development.

Obesity: Being overweight or obese has been associated with a higher risk of developing stomach cancer, particularly in the upper part of the stomach (cardia). Obesity can lead to chronic inflammation and increase the likelihood of conditions that can promote cancer growth.

Chronic Stomach Conditions: Conditions like gastric ulcers, gastritis (inflammation of the stomach lining), and stomach polyps can increase the risk of gastric cancer. Chronic atrophic gastritis, which results in thinning and inflammation of the stomach lining, is particularly concerning for cancer development.

Previous Stomach Surgery: People who have had stomach surgery, such as partial gastrectomy, for ulcers or other medical reasons, may have an increased risk of stomach cancer later in life. The changes in the stomach after surgery can sometimes promote cancerous growth.

Exposure to Workplace Chemicals: Certain occupations expose individuals to chemicals that may increase the risk of gastric cancer. For example, workers in industries such as rubber, coal, and metal may be at higher risk due to exposure to toxic substances.

Alcohol Consumption: Excessive alcohol consumption can damage the stomach lining, increase inflammation, and potentially lead to the development of gastric cancer over time.

Risk Factors of Gastric (Stomach) Cancer
Helicobacter pylori infection
Smoking
Poor diet (high in salty, smoked foods)
Family history
Age (50+)
Gender (more common in men)
Chronic gastritis
Obesity
Previous stomach surgery
Genetic mutations (e.g., Lynch syndrome)
Symptoms of Gastric (Stomach) Cancer
Persistent indigestion: Discomfort in the upper abdomen, bloating, and feeling full after eating even small amounts of food.
Loss of appetite: A significant reduction in appetite, often accompanied by early satiety (feeling full quickly).
Unexplained weight loss: Losing weight without changes in diet or physical activity.
Nausea and vomiting: Ongoing nausea, sometimes with vomiting, especially if the cancer causes obstruction.
Abdominal pain or discomfort: Cramping, pressure, or aching pain in the upper abdomen, which may worsen after eating.
Frequent heartburn or acid reflux: Symptoms that don't respond well to antacids or over-the-counter treatments.
Blood in stool or vomit: Vomiting blood (bright red or dark, coffee-ground material) or black, tarry stools.
Swelling or fluid buildup in the abdomen (ascites): Bloating or distention of the abdomen due to fluid accumulation.
Fatigue: Unexplained tiredness or weakness, often due to nutrient malabsorption or the effects of the cancer.
Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia): Feeling like food is stuck in the chest or throat, especially if the cancer is near the stomach-esophagus junction.
Anemia: Symptoms like pale skin, dizziness, or shortness of breath due to low red blood cell count from internal bleeding.
Need an Appointment?Click here

Diagnosis for Gastric (Stomach) Cancer
Medical History and Physical Exam: The doctor will first take a detailed medical history and perform a physical exam to check for symptoms such as abdominal pain, lumps, or signs of anemia or jaundice.

Endoscopy (Gastroscopy): This is one of the primary methods for diagnosing stomach cancer. A flexible tube with a light and camera (endoscope) is inserted through the mouth to examine the stomach lining. The doctor can look for abnormal areas and take biopsies (tissue samples) for further analysis.

Biopsy: During an endoscopy, the doctor may take small tissue samples (biopsies) from suspicious areas of the stomach lining. These samples are examined under a microscope to determine if cancer cells are present.

Imaging Tests: Imaging studies help assess the size of the tumor and whether cancer has spread to other areas. Common imaging tests include:

CT Scan (Computed Tomography): A CT scan provides detailed cross-sectional images of the stomach and surrounding organs, helping doctors determine the extent of the cancer and check for metastasis.
Ultrasound: In some cases, an ultrasound may be used to detect tumors or fluid buildup in the abdomen.
X-rays: A special type of X-ray called a barium swallow can be used to visualize the upper gastrointestinal tract. The patient swallows a barium solution, which highlights the stomach on X-ray images.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Scan: PET scans can help detect cancer spread by showing areas of high metabolic activity, which are typically associated with cancer cells.
Endoscopic Ultrasound (EUS): This procedure combines endoscopy with ultrasound. The endoscope has an ultrasound probe at its tip, which helps assess the tumor’s size and whether it has invaded nearby tissues or lymph nodes.

Laparoscopy: In some cases, a laparoscopy (a minimally invasive surgery) is performed to examine the abdomen more closely and take biopsy samples from areas that may not be easily accessed through an endoscopy. This method is particularly useful for detecting metastasis.

Blood Tests: While there is no specific blood test to diagnose stomach cancer, certain blood tests can provide valuable information. These tests can help assess general health, detect anemia (common in stomach cancer), or indicate the presence of tumor markers (such as CEA or CA 19-9) that may be elevated in some patients with stomach cancer.

Genetic Testing: In cases where stomach cancer may have a genetic link (such as hereditary diffuse gastric cancer), genetic testing may be done to look for inherited mutations that increase the risk of developing the disease.

Treatments for Gastric (Stomach) Cancer
Surgery is a key component in the treatment plan for stomach cancer. It involves removing part or all of the stomach, nearby lymph nodes, and sometimes other surrounding tissues. This

Surgery
Surgery is the primary treatment for early-stage stomach cancer, where the cancer is confined to the stomach or surrounding tissues. The types of surgery include:

Partial Gastrectomy: In this procedure, the portion of the stomach containing the tumor is removed. The remaining part of the stomach is reattached to the small intestine.
Total Gastrectomy: In cases where the cancer has spread throughout the stomach, a total gastrectomy may be performed, which involves the removal of the entire stomach. Afterward, the esophagus is connected directly to the small intestine.
Lymph Node Removal: Often, lymph nodes near the stomach are removed to check for cancer spread.
Surgery is typically followed by other treatments to address any remaining cancer cells.

Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy uses drugs to kill cancer cells or stop their growth. It may be used:

Before surgery (Neoadjuvant chemotherapy): To shrink tumors and make them easier to remove surgically.
After surgery (Adjuvant chemotherapy): To kill any remaining cancer cells and reduce the risk of recurrence.
For advanced cancer: If the cancer is not operable or has spread to other parts of the body, chemotherapy can help control its growth and relieve symptoms.
Chemotherapy drugs can be given orally, intravenously, or directly into the abdominal cavity in some cases.

Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy uses high-energy rays to kill or shrink cancer cells. It is not often used as the primary treatment for stomach cancer but may be helpful in certain situations:

After surgery: To kill any remaining cancer cells that might not have been removed.
Palliative care: To relieve symptoms, such as pain or obstruction, caused by advanced cancer.
procedure aims to remove the tumor and any affected areas to prevent further spread. Another common treatment option is chemotherapy. This involves using drugs to kill cancer cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy can be administered before surgery (neoadjuvant) to shrink tumors or after surgery (adjuvant) to destroy any remaining cancer cells. Radiation therapy may also be used in combination with surgery or chemotherapy. It uses high-energy beams to target and kill cancer cells. This can help reduce tumor size before surgery or destroy any remaining cancer cells after surgery. In some cases, targeted therapy may be recommended. This type of treatment uses drugs that specifically target certain genetic mutations or proteins present in stomach cancer cells. By targeting these specific abnormalities, targeted therapy can slow down tumor growth and improve patient outcomes. Immunotherapy is another emerging approach in treating stomach cancer. It works by boosting the body's immune system to recognize and attack cancer cells more effectively. This type of treatment has shown promising results in certain cases where other treatments have been less effective. It's important for patients diagnosed with stomach cancer to work closely with their healthcare team to determine the most appropriate treatment plan based on their specific situation. Each case is unique, and a personalized approach is crucial for achieving optimal outcomes in managing this disease.

Preventive Measures for Gastric (Stomach) Cancer
Increase intake of fruits and vegetables: A diet rich in fruits and vegetables provides antioxidants and vitamins, which may help reduce the risk of stomach cancer. Cruciferous vegetables (like broccoli, cauliflower, and cabbage) are particularly beneficial.
Limit consumption of smoked, salted, and pickled foods: These foods contain compounds, such as nitrates and nitrites, which may increase the risk of stomach cancer. Processed meats, like bacon and sausages, are also associated with a higher risk.
Avoid excessive alcohol consumption: Drinking large amounts of alcohol can increase the risk of stomach cancer, especially in combination with smoking. Limiting alcohol intake to moderate levels or avoiding it altogether can help reduce risk.
Choose lean meats and low-fat cooking methods: Cooking meats at high temperatures (such as grilling or barbecuing) can produce carcinogenic substances. Opting for lean cuts of meat and using healthier cooking methods, like baking or steaming, may lower risk.
Increase fiber intake: A high-fiber diet, particularly from whole grains, may protect against stomach cancer by promoting a healthy digestive system.
Avoid tobacco use: Smoking is a major risk factor for many cancers, including stomach cancer. Quitting smoking can significantly reduce the risk of developing the disease. Avoiding exposure to secondhand smoke is also important.
Treat H. pylori infections: Chronic infection with the bacterium Helicobacter pylori is a known risk factor for stomach cancer. If you are diagnosed with an H. pylori infection, it is important to follow through with antibiotic treatment as prescribed by a healthcare provider to eradicate the bacteria and reduce cancer risk.
Regular check-ups for at-risk individuals: People with a family history of gastric cancer or those from regions where H. pylori infection is common may benefit from regular screening for the infection.
Do's & Don’t's
When it comes to stomach cancer, knowing the do's and don'ts can make a significant difference in managing the condition and improving overall health. By following these guidelines, individuals can take proactive steps to support their well-being and potentially reduce the risk of complications. 

Do's	Don't
Eat a balanced and varied diet rich in fruits, vegetables, and whole grains	Avoid excessive consumption of processed and red meats
Include foods high in antioxidants, such as berries, nuts, and leafy greens	Limit intake of pickled and salt-preserved foods
Maintain a healthy weight through regular exercise	Avoid tobacco use, including smoking and chewing
Stay hydrated by drinking an adequate amount of water	Limit alcohol consumption, or avoid it altogether
Practice proper food hygiene to prevent infections	Don't ignore persistent digestive issues or symptoms
Regularly undergo screenings and check-ups if at risk	Avoid excessive use of certain pain relievers, like NSAIDs
Seek professional advice for a well-balanced diet plan	Don't ignore family history; discuss it with your doctor
Manage stress through activities like meditation or yoga	Avoid exposure to harmful chemicals and carcinogens
Get vaccinated against Helicobacter pylori if recommended	Don't delay seeking medical attention for symptoms
Stay informed about stomach cancer symptoms and risk factors	Avoid self-diagnosis; consult a healthcare professional

If you suspect you or someone else is experiencing Stomach cancer, it is crucial to seek immediate medical attention by calling emergency services or consult with a Cancer Specialist.

Dengue – vector-borne disease rising in tropical regions

Dengue (break-bone fever) is a viral infection that is spread from mosquitoes to people. It is more common in tropical and subtropical than in temperate climates.

Most people who get dengue do not have symptoms. For those who do, the most common symptoms are high fever, headache, body aches, nausea and rash. Most get better in 1–2 weeks. Some develop severe dengue and need care in a hospital. 

In severe cases, dengue can be fatal.  

You can lower your risk of dengue by avoiding mosquito bites, especially during the day.

Dengue is treated through pain management as there is no specific treatment currently.

Symptoms
Most people with dengue have mild or no symptoms and will get better in 1–2 weeks. Rarely, dengue can be severe and lead to death.  

If symptoms occur, they usually begin 4–10 days after infection and last for 2–7 days. Symptoms may include:

high fever (40°C/104°F)
severe headache
pain behind the eyes
muscle and joint pains
nausea
vomiting
swollen glands
rash. 
Individuals who are infected for the second time are at greater risk of severe dengue. The symptoms of severe dengue often come after the fever has gone away and may include:

severe abdominal pain
persistent vomiting
rapid breathing
bleeding gums or nose 
fatigue
restlessness
blood in vomit or stool
being very thirsty
pale and cold skin
feeling weak.
People with these severe symptoms should seek care immediately.  

After recovery, people who have had dengue may experience fatigue for several weeks.

Diagnostics and treatment
Laboratory-based and point of care diagnostics are critical to control and manage dengue, yet global disparities in laboratory capabilities present significant challenges. The diagnostic algorithms, testing strategies and test methodologies employed vary, depending on the capabilities of national laboratory systems. The wide range of available tests – including nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) and rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) –  vary significantly in quality and performance.

Laboratory testing for arboviruses can be accomplished through either direct detection methods such as virus isolation, molecular detection of nucleic acid or antigen testing, including rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) within the first week of illness.

There is no specific treatment for dengue, although pain can be managed with medication such as paracetamol (acetaminophen). Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicines such as ibuprofen and aspirin should be avoided as they can increase the risk of bleeding.

For people with severe dengue, hospitalization is often necessary.

Global burden

The incidence of dengue has grown dramatically worldwide in recent decades, with the number of cases reported to WHO increasing from 505 430 cases in 2000 to 14.6 million in 2024. The vast majority of cases are asymptomatic or mild and self-managed, and hence the actual numbers of dengue cases are under-reported. The disease is now endemic in more than 100 countries.

In 2024, more cases of dengue were recorded than ever before in a 12-month period, affecting over 100 countries on all continents. During 2024, ongoing transmission, combined with an unexpected spike in dengue cases, resulted in a historic high of over 14.6 million cases and more than 12 000 dengue-related deaths reported. The Region of the Americas contributed a significant proportion of the global burden, with over 13 million cases reported to WHO. 

Several factors are associated with the increasing risk of spread of the dengue epidemic, including the changing distribution of the responsible vectors (chiefly Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus), especially in previously dengue-naive countries; climate change leading to increasing temperatures, high rainfall and humidity; fragile and overburdened health systems; limitations in surveillance and reporting; and political and financial instabilities in countries facing complex humanitarian crises and high population movements.

One modelling estimate indicates 390 million dengue virus infections per year, of which 96 million manifest clinically(1).A recent study on the prevalence of dengue estimates that 5.6 billion people are at risk of infection with dengue and other arboviruses(2).

From January to July 2025, over 4 million cases and over 3000 deaths have been reported to WHO from 97 countries.
Dengue is spreading to new areas, including the European and Eastern Mediterranean regions. In 2024, 308 cases were reported to WHO from three European countries (France, Italy and Spain) and an additional 1291 cases and four deaths were recorded in the French overseas territories of Mayotte and Réunion. 

Transmission

Transmission through the mosquito bite
The dengue virus is transmitted to humans through the bites of infected female mosquitoes, primarily the Aedes aegypti mosquito. Other species within the Aedes genus can also act as vectors, but their contribution is normally secondary to Aedes aegypti.

After feeding on a DENV-infected person, the virus replicates in the mosquito midgut before disseminating to secondary tissues, including the salivary glands. The time it takes from ingesting the virus to actual transmission to a new host is termed the extrinsic incubation period (EIP). The EIP takes about 8–12 days when the ambient temperature is 25–28°C. Variations in the EIP are not only influenced by ambient temperature but also by several other factors – such as the magnitude of daily temperature fluctuations, the virus genotype, and the initial viral concentration – which can also alter the time it takes for a mosquito to transmit the virus. Once infectious, a mosquito can transmit the virus for the rest of its life.

Human-to-mosquito transmission
Mosquitoes can become infected by people who are viremic with DENV. This can be someone who has a symptomatic dengue infection, someone who is yet to have a symptomatic infection (those who are pre-symptomatic), and also someone who shows no signs of illness (those who are asymptomatic).

Human-to-mosquito transmission can occur up to 2 days before someone shows symptoms of the illness, and up to 2 days after the fever has resolved.

The risk of mosquito infection is positively associated with high viremia and high fever in the patient; conversely, high levels of DENV-specific antibodies are associated with a decreased risk of mosquito infection. Most people are viremic for about 4–5 days, but viremia can last as long as 12 days.

Maternal transmission
The primary mode of transmission of the DENV between humans involves mosquito vectors. There is evidence, however, of the possibility of maternal transmission (i.e. from a pregnant mother to her baby). At the same time, vertical transmission rates appear low, with the risk of vertical transmission seemingly linked to the timing of acquiring the dengue infection during pregnancy. When a mother does have a dengue infection when she is pregnant, babies may suffer from pre-term birth, low birthweight and fetal distress.

Other transmission modes
Rare cases of transmission via blood products, organ donation and transfusions have been recorded. Similarly, transovarial transmission of the virus within mosquitoes has also been recorded. 

Risk factors
Previous infection with DENV increases the risk of an individual developing severe dengue.

Urbanization (especially rapid, unplanned urbanization), is associated with dengue transmission through multiple social and environmental factors: population density, human mobility, access to reliable water source, water storage practices, etc.

Community risks to dengue also depend on population knowledge, attitudes and practices towards dengue, as exposure is closely related to behaviours such as water storage, plant-keeping and self-protection against mosquito bites. Routine vector surveillance and control activities and targeted community engagement greatly enhance resilience. 

Vectors can adapt to new environments and climate. The interaction between the dengue virus, the host and the environment is dynamic. Consequently, disease risks may change and shift with climate change in tropical and subtropical areas, in combination with increased urbanization and population movement.

Prevention and control
The mosquitoes that spread dengue are active during the day. 

To lower your risk of getting dengue, protect yourself from mosquito bites by using: 

clothes that cover as much of your body as possible;
mosquito nets, ideally sprayed with insect repellent, if sleeping during the day;
window screens;
mosquito repellents (containing DEET, Picaridin or IR3535); and
coils and vaporizers.
To prevent mosquitoes from breeding:

implement environmental management and modification practices to stop mosquitoes from accessing egg-laying habitats;
dispose of solid waste properly and remove artificial habitats that can hold water;
cover, empty and clean domestic water storage containers on a weekly basis; and
apply appropriate insecticides to water storage outdoor containers.
If you get dengue, it’s important to:

rest;
drink plenty of liquids;
use acetaminophen (paracetamol) for pain;
avoid non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication such as ibuprofen and aspirin; and
watch for severe symptoms and contact your doctor as soon as possible if you notice any.
Currently, one vaccine (QDenga) is available and licensed in some countries. However, it is recommended only for those aged 6–16 years in high transmission settings. Several additional vaccines are under evaluation.


Kidney Stones – increasing with lifestyle & diet changes

Kidney Stone (Renal Calculi)

Kidney stones are hard deposits made of minerals and salts that form inside the kidneys. They develop when substances such as calcium, oxalate, and uric acid become concentrated in urine and crystallize. Kidney stones can vary in size, from very small particles to large stones that can block the urinary tract.

Kidney stones may pass out of the body naturally through urine, but larger stones can cause significant pain and complications. The condition can affect people of any age and is more common in individuals who do not drink enough fluids or have certain dietary and metabolic risk factors.

Common Symptoms

Severe pain in the lower back or side

Pain that spreads to the abdomen or groin

Burning sensation while urinating

Blood in urine (pink, red, or brown color)

Frequent urge to urinate

Nausea and vomiting

Fever and chills (if infection is present)

Causes and Risk Factors

Dehydration or low water intake

High intake of salt, protein, or oxalate-rich foods

Family history of kidney stones

Obesity or sedentary lifestyle

Certain medical conditions (e.g., gout, urinary tract infections)

Some medications and supplements

Types of Kidney Stones

Calcium stones – most common type

Uric acid stones

Struvite stones (often linked to infections)

Cystine stones (rare, genetic condition)

Diagnosis

Urine tests

Blood tests

Imaging tests such as ultrasound, X-ray, or CT scan

Treatment (High-Level)

Drinking plenty of fluids

Pain management medications

Medications to help pass stones

Medical procedures for larger stones (e.g., shock wave therapy or surgery)

Treatment depends on the size, type, and location of the stone.

Prevention

Drink adequate water daily

Reduce salt intake

Maintain a balanced diet

Avoid excessive protein consumption

Follow medical advice if you have recurrent stones

Important Note

This information is for educational purposes only. Kidney stone symptoms can resemble other serious conditions. If someone experiences severe pain, blood in urine, fever, 
or difficulty urinating, they should consult a qualified healthcare professional.

Urinary Tract Infection (UTI)

What is a urinary tract infection (UTI)?
A urinary tract infection (UTI) is an infection of your urinary system. This type of infection can involve your:

Urethra (urethritis).
Kidneys (pyelonephritis).
Bladder (cystitis).
Urine (pee) is a byproduct of your blood-filtering system, which your kidneys perform. Your kidneys create pee when they remove waste products and excess water from your blood. Pee usually moves through your urinary system without any contamination. However, bacteria can get into your urinary system, which can cause UTIs.

What is the urinary tract?
The urinary tract makes and stores pee. It includes your:

Kidneys. Kidneys are small, bean-shaped organs on the back of your body, above your hips. Most people have two kidneys. They filter water and waste products from your blood, which becomes pee. Common wastes include urea and creatinine.
Ureters. Your ureters are thin tubes that carry pee from your kidneys to your bladder.
Bladder. Your bladder is a balloon-like organ that stores pee before it leaves your body.
Urethra. The urethra is a tube that carries pee from your bladder to the outside of your body.
How common are urinary tract infections?
UTIs are very common, especially in females. About half of females will have a UTI at some point during their lives. Males can also get UTIs, as well as children, though they only affect 1% to 2% of children. Healthcare providers treat 8 million to 10 million people each year for UTIs.

Symptoms and Causes
Back to video
A urinary tract infection is a very common type of infection in your urinary system.
What are the signs of a urinary tract infection?
A UTI causes inflammation in the lining of your urinary tract. The inflammation may cause the following problems:

Pain in your flank, abdomen, pelvic area or lower back.
Pressure in the lower part of your pelvis.
Cloudy, foul-smelling pee.
Urinary incontinence.
Frequent urination.
Urge incontinence.
Pain when you pee (dysuria).
Blood in your pee (hematuria).
Other UTI-associated symptoms may include:

Pain in your penis.
Feeling extremely tired (fatigue).
Fever.
Chills.
Nausea and vomiting.
Mental changes or confusion.
How do you get a urinary tract infection?
Microorganisms — usually bacteria — cause urinary tract infections. They typically enter through your urethra and may infect your bladder. The infection can also travel up from your bladder through your ureters and eventually infect your kidneys.

What is the major cause of a urinary tract infection?
E. coli cause more than 90% of bladder infections. E. coli typically exist in your lower intestines (large intestine).

Who is at the greatest risk of getting a urinary tract infection?
Anyone can get a urinary tract infection, but you’re more likely to get a UTI if you don't have a penis. This is because your urethra is shorter and closer to your anus, where E. coli bacteria are common.

Can you get a UTI from fingers?
Yes, it’s possible to get a UTI from your fingers. Your hands can pick up bacteria and other microorganisms whenever you touch a surface. You can accidentally introduce bacteria to your urethra when you go to the bathroom or during sexual acts, including masturbation or fingering.

It’s a good idea to wash your hands before and after going to the bathroom or having sex.

Diagnosis and Tests
How do you know if you have a UTI?
If you have symptoms of a urinary tract infection, talk to a healthcare provider. They’ll ask questions about your symptoms, review your medical history and conduct a physical examination. They can also order tests to help confirm a diagnosis.

What tests will be done to diagnose a urinary tract infection?
A healthcare provider may order the following tests to diagnose a UTI:

Urinalysis. During this test, you’ll pee into a special cup. The provider will send the sample to a laboratory, where technicians will examine it for signs of a UTI using multiple variables such as nitrites, leukocyte esterase and white blood cells.
Urine culture. You’ll pee into a special cup, and lab technicians will test your sample to grow and identify any bacteria that are present. Urine cultures are important because they help your provider determine the most appropriate treatment.
If your infection doesn’t respond to treatment, a provider may order the following tests to examine your urinary tract for a disease or injury:

Ultrasound. An ultrasound is an imaging test that helps your provider look at your internal organs. An ultrasound is painless and doesn’t require any preparation.
Computed tomography (CT) scan. A CT scan is another imaging test. It’s a type of X-ray that takes cross-section images of your body — like slices — that create 3D images of the inside of your body. A CT scan is more precise than a standard X-ray.
Cystoscopy. A cystoscopy uses a cystoscope to look inside your bladder through your urethra. A cystoscope is a thin instrument with a lens and a light at the end.
If you get UTIs frequently, a healthcare provider may perform tests to check for other health issues — such as diabetes or an abnormal urinary system — that may contribute to your infections.

Management and Treatment
What is the best thing to do for a urinary tract infection?
The best thing to do for a urinary tract infection is to see a healthcare provider. You need antibiotics to treat a UTI. Your provider will select an antibiotic that works best against the bacteria responsible for your infection.

Once you get a prescription for antibiotics, it’s very important that you follow the directions for taking them. Be sure to take the full course of antibiotics, even if your symptoms go away and you start feeling better. If you don’t finish all your medicine, the infection can return and be more challenging to treat.

If you get UTIs a lot, a provider may recommend that you take antibiotics:

Every day.
Every other day.
After sex.
At the first sign of symptoms.
Talk to a provider about your best treatment option if you have a history of frequent UTIs.

What specific antibiotics are used to treat a urinary tract infection?
Healthcare providers commonly prescribe the following antibiotics to treat UTIs:

Nitrofurantoin.
Sulfonamides (sulfa drugs), such as sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim.
Amoxicillin.
Cephalosporins, such as cephalexin.
Doxycycline.
Fosfomycin.
Quinolones, such as ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin.
If you get UTIs often, a healthcare provider may give you low-dose antibiotics for a short time to prevent the infection from coming back. The provider may recommend this cautious approach to treat frequent UTIs because your body can develop resistance to the antibiotic, and you can get other types of infections, including C. diff colitis. This practice isn’t very common.

Can I become immune to the antibiotics used to treat a UTI?
Sort of. Every time you use antibiotics to treat a UTI, the infection adapts and can become harder to fight (antibiotic resistance). But the infection becomes immune to the antibiotics, not you. Antibiotics may not always be the best solution. As a result, a healthcare provider may suggest alternative treatments if you get frequent urinary tract infections. These may include:

Waiting. Your provider may suggest a “watch and wait” approach to your symptoms. During this time, it’s a good idea to drink plenty of fluids (especially water) to help flush out your system.
Intravenous (IV) treatment. In some complicated cases, a UTI may be resistant to antibiotics, or the infection may move to your kidneys. You may need treatment at a hospital, where providers will give you medicine through a needle they insert into a vein, usually in your arm (intravenously). Once you return home, you may need to take oral antibiotics for a period to rid yourself of the infection completely.
Does cranberry juice prevent a urinary tract infection?
Cranberry juice that you can buy at the grocery store doesn’t prevent a UTI. However, cranberry extract supplements (vitamin pills) may decrease your chances of getting a UTI.

If you get UTIs often, methenamine hippurate is another nonantibiotic alternative that helps prevent infections.

Can a UTI go away on its own?
Minor urinary tract infections can sometimes get better on their own. However, most UTIs need antibiotics to go away. You absolutely need antibiotics if you have a UTI as well as:

A fever.
Chills.
Nausea and vomiting.
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
Most people feel better within a few days after starting antibiotics to treat a UTI.

Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a urinary tract infection?
The outlook for urinary tract infections is good. Most UTIs usually respond very well to treatment. A UTI can be annoying or uncomfortable before you start treatment. However, once a healthcare provider identifies the bacteria and prescribes the appropriate antibiotic, your symptoms should improve quickly.

It’s important to finish all of the antibiotics that your healthcare provider prescribes. If you have frequent UTIs or your symptoms aren’t improving, your provider may test to see if your infection is resistant to antibiotics. Antibiotic-resistant infections may require IV antibiotics or other treatments.

Prevention
Can I prevent a urinary tract infection?
The following lifestyle changes can help prevent urinary tract infections:

Practice good hygiene
Practicing good hygiene is one of the best ways to help prevent UTIs. This is especially important if you have a vagina because your urethra is much shorter, and it’s easier for E. coli to move from your rectum back into your body. Always wipe from front to back after a bowel movement (pooping) to avoid this.

During your menstrual cycle, it’s also a good idea to regularly change your period products, including pads and tampons. You should also avoid using any deodorants on your vagina.

Drink plenty of fluids
Drinking extra fluids — especially water — each day can help flush out bacteria from your urinary tract. Healthcare providers recommend drinking six to eight glasses of water daily.

Change your peeing habits
Peeing can play a big role in getting rid of bacteria from your body. Your pee is a waste product, and each time you empty your bladder, you help remove that waste from your body.

Peeing frequently can reduce your risk of developing an infection, especially if you get UTIs a lot.

You should also try to pee right before and right after having sex. Sex can introduce bacteria to your urethra, and peeing before and after sex helps flush it out. If you can’t pee, wash the area with warm water.

Change your birth control
You may have an increased risk of developing a UTI if you use a diaphragm for birth control. Talk to a healthcare provider about other birth control options.

Use a water-based lubricant during sex
If you use lubricant during sex, make sure it’s water-based. You should also avoid spermicide if you have frequent UTIs.

Change your clothing
Tight-fitting clothing can create a moist environment, which promotes bacterial growth. You can try loose-fitting clothing and cotton underwear to prevent moisture from accumulating around your urethra.

Medications
If you’re postmenopausal, a healthcare provider may suggest a vaginal cream that contains estrogen. These creams may help reduce your risk of developing a UTI by changing the pH of your vagina. Talk to a healthcare provider if you’re postmenopausal and get a lot of UTIs.

Over-the-counter (OTC) supplements — including cranberry extract and probiotics — may also help prevent UTIs. Talk to a healthcare provider before you start taking any supplements.