Upper endoscopy: Can help your provider diagnose celiac disease or other GI conditions. This procedure uses a scope that allows your provider to see inside your esophagus (food tube), stomach and the first part of your small intestine (duodenum).
Amebiasis (amoebic dysentery).
Diagnosis of Myocardial Infarction
Additional details about symptoms per type of diabetes include:
Migraines in children (abdominal migraine).
No tobacco products.
A burning feeling. Acid literally burns the tissues in your esophagus. If it feels like it’s in your chest, it’s called heartburn. If it feels closer to your stomach, you might call it acid indigestion.
How well you follow your treatment plan.
Parkinson’s disease isn’t curable, which means it’s a permanent, lifelong condition.
How common is this condition?
Flashing lights or patterns.
Seeds and nuts.
Eating foods that have a lot of salt and fat.
Several symptoms are possible that aren’t connected to movement and muscle control. In years past, experts believed non-motor symptoms were risk factors for this disease when seen before motor symptoms. However, there’s a growing amount of evidence that these symptoms can appear in the earliest stages of the disease. That means these symptoms might be warning signs that start years or even decades before motor symptoms.
Hallucinations and other psychosis symptoms.
Body aches.
Certain health conditions can put you at higher risk for severe illness from the flu. This includes life-threatening complications that require hospitalization. You’re at higher risk for serious illness if you:
Trouble sleeping.
Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) – This kind of bacterial pneumonia is contracted while in the hospital. Because the bacteria implicated may be more resistant to drugs than other varieties, it can be more dangerous.
You might notice mood or personality changes in a person with Alzheimer’s disease. They might:
The only way to detect hypertension is to have a health professional measure blood pressure. Having blood pressure measured is quick and painless. Although individuals can measure their own blood pressure using automated devices, an evaluation by a health professional is important for assessment of risk and associated conditions.
Diabetes.
Medical treatments for breast cancers, which may be given before (“neoadjuvant”) or after (“adjuvant”) surgery, are based on the biological subtyping of the cancers. Certain subtypes of breast cancer, such as triple negative (those that do not express estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) or HER-2 receptor), are more aggressive than others.
Despite the similarities in symptoms between viral and bacterial pneumonia, viral pneumonia is frequently milder. Without treatment, it can improve in 1 to 3 weeks. People with viral pneumonia are at risk of acquiring bacterial pneumonia, according to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
See a provider if you think you might have a peptic ulcer. Over-the-counter medications may ease pain, but they won’t fix the root cause.
If you have severe GERD or it causes complications that medicine can’t help, you might need surgery. But surgery is usually minor and effective. It’s worth treating GERD to prevent its complications.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Stroke.
Not everyone should take certain OTCs, so check with your provider before you use them. It’s also a good idea to make sure certain medications are okay to use together or with supplements. Don’t give aspirin to children under the age of 16 unless their provider says it’s okay.
Genetic testing.
Transmission
Your stomach contents are supposed to travel only one way: down. When acid from inside your stomach flows backward — meaning, up — into your esophagus and throat, it’s called acid reflux.
What can I expect if I have acid reflux?
lung infections, like the flu or pneumonia
Children
Diagnosing Parkinson’s disease is mostly a clinical process, meaning it relies heavily on a healthcare provider examining your symptoms, asking questions and reviewing your medical history. Some diagnostic and lab tests are possible, but these are usually needed to rule out other conditions or certain causes.
Risk factors for IBS
Kidney stones are hard deposits made of minerals and salts that form inside the kidneys. They develop when substances such as calcium, oxalate, and uric acid become concentrated in urine and crystallize. Kidney stones can vary in size, from very small particles to large stones that can block the urinary tract.
Not necessarily. Several conditions, such as BPH and prostatitis, can mimic the symptoms of prostate cancer. These are non-cancerous and more common in younger men. However, any persistent urinary, sexual, or pelvic symptoms should be evaluated by a urologist to rule out cancer and ensure early intervention if needed.
Stage C
Researchers don’t know why some people get Alzheimer’s disease and others don’t. Some risk factors may include:
Symptoms involving your intestines (diarrhea, cramps), together with symptoms involving your stomach (nausea, vomiting) are the hallmarks of gastroenteritis. You’ll know it if it’s “coming out both ends.”
The influenza virus spreads from direct or indirect contact with someone else who’s infected. Common ways to get the flu include:
deep venous thrombosis.
Get a flu vaccine every year.
Frequent urination.
Muscle weakness.
Are under 5 years old or over 65 years old.
Elevated levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, or "bad" cholesterol, contribute to the formation of plaques in the arteries. On the other hand, high levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, or "good" cholesterol, can help remove plaque and reduce the risk of heart disease.
Blood in stool or vomit: Vomiting blood (bright red or dark, coffee-ground material) or black, tarry stools.
Flare-ups are often caused by a respiratory infection, and people may be given an antibiotic or steroid tablets in addition to inhaled or nebulised treatment as needed.
Treatment for people with Stage C and Stage D heart failure and preserved EF (HFpEF) includes:
Generalized onset seizures
Lifestyle changes can help improve symptoms of COPD.
Babies are more likely to have GERD if they’re born prematurely or with a condition that affects their esophagus. A pediatrician might check for GERD if your baby seems to be struggling in some way.
Epilepsy is also called a seizure disorder.
The risk of non-melanoma skin cancers has been examined with respect to personal exposure, and the following conclusions can be drawn:
Brachytherapy (Internal Radiation using radioactive seeds)
Sudden cardiac arrest.
Bronchitis treatment
Inhalers can help control the disease and enable people with asthma to enjoy a normal, active life.
Management and Treatment
Cancer has spread to nearby organs (like the bladder or rectum), lymph nodes, or distant organs such as the bones or lungs.
Fosfomycin.
Frequent urination.
In severe cases, dengue can be fatal.
When prostate cancer is confined to the gland or diagnosed early, curative treatments may be advised.
surgery
Revert to speaking in the language you spoke most when you were growing up
Clear lungs.
Hypnotherapy.
Through an IV (intravenously).
Surgery options include surgical resection (removal of abnormal tissue), disconnection (cutting fiber bundles that connect areas of your brain), stereotactic radiosurgery (targeted destruction of abnormal brain tissue) or implantation of neuromodulation devices. These devices send electrical impulses to your brain to reduce seizures over time.
Treatments include:
5. Chemotherapy
Many people will not have symptoms in the early stages of the disease.
Mental changes or confusion.
Heart failure is a chronic condition that gets worse with time. There are four heart failure stages (Stages A, B, C and D). They range from having a high risk of developing heart failure to having advanced heart failure.
In general, people with TB infection don’t feel sick and are not contagious. Only a small proportion of people who get infected with TB will get TB disease and develop symptoms. Babies and children are at higher risk of developing the disease if they are infected.
chills
Invasive cancers can spread to nearby lymph nodes or other organs (metastasize). Metastasis can be life-threatening and fatal.
Be cautious when taking over-the-counter pain relievers. Sometimes, overusing them can cause analgesic-rebound headaches or a dependency problem. If you’re taking any over-the-counter pain medications more than two to three times a week, let your healthcare provider know. They may suggest more effective prescription medications.
If it’s happening right now, try:
Whether your acid reflux bothers you a lot or a little, it’s a good idea to discuss it with a healthcare provider. They can assess whether it’s causing you complications that you may be unaware of.
Barrett’s esophagus. Barret’s esophagus is the name for intestinal metaplasia of your esophagus. It means that the tissues lining your esophagus change to look like intestinal lining. This change happens after long exposure to acid and inflammation. It’s a risk factor for esophageal cancer.
mosquito repellents (containing DEET, Picaridin or IR3535); and
procedure aims to remove the tumor and any affected areas to prevent further spread. Another common treatment option is chemotherapy. This involves using drugs to kill cancer cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy can be administered before surgery (neoadjuvant) to shrink tumors or after surgery (adjuvant) to destroy any remaining cancer cells. Radiation therapy may also be used in combination with surgery or chemotherapy. It uses high-energy beams to target and kill cancer cells. This can help reduce tumor size before surgery or destroy any remaining cancer cells after surgery. In some cases, targeted therapy may be recommended. This type of treatment uses drugs that specifically target certain genetic mutations or proteins present in stomach cancer cells. By targeting these specific abnormalities, targeted therapy can slow down tumor growth and improve patient outcomes. Immunotherapy is another emerging approach in treating stomach cancer. It works by boosting the body's immune system to recognize and attack cancer cells more effectively. This type of treatment has shown promising results in certain cases where other treatments have been less effective. It's important for patients diagnosed with stomach cancer to work closely with their healthcare team to determine the most appropriate treatment plan based on their specific situation. Each case is unique, and a personalized approach is crucial for achieving optimal outcomes in managing this disease.
Questions About Tracking Your Liver Health and MASH Progression?
Hiatal hernia. A hiatal hernia happens when the top of your stomach pushes up through the hole in your diaphragm where your esophagus passes through. It squeezes in next to your esophagus, compressing them both and trapping acid. It also moves your LES above your diaphragm, where it loses some of its muscular support. Hiatal hernias are very common, especially as you get older. They usually occur gradually, and they can gradually worsen.
Numbness or tingling in your hands or feet.
Keep your baby up-to-date on all of the recommended immunizations. They won’t stop colds, but they can help prevent some complications, such as bacterial infections of their ears or lungs.
Prevention
Bladder (cystitis).
Type 3c diabetes: This form of diabetes happens when your pancreas experiences damage (other than autoimmune damage), which affects its ability to produce insulin. Pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer, cystic fibrosis and hemochromatosis can all lead to pancreas damage that causes diabetes. Having your pancreas removed (pancreatectomy) also results in Type 3c.
Heavy drinking can raise blood pressure and cholesterol levels, contributing to the risk of developing coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction.
How can colds in babies be prevented?
GERD stands for gastroesophageal reflux disease. Depending on where you live, it may be spelled GORD for gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. However you spell it, GERD is chronic acid reflux in your esophagus. Acid reflux is considered chronic when you’ve had it at least twice a week for several weeks.
Complications
Parkinson’s disease has several common non-motor (non-movement) symptoms and motor symptoms. Non-motor symptoms sometimes appear years ahead of motor symptoms.
Charts and tables: WHO child growth standards for children aged under 5 years
In a subgroup of patients, single major etiological factors can be identified (e.g. medications, diseases, immobilization, iatrogenic procedures, and monogenic disease/genetic syndrome).
If you suspect you or someone else is experiencing Stomach cancer, it is crucial to seek immediate medical attention by calling emergency services or consult with a Cancer Specialist.
If you’re sick with the flu, you should avoid being around others, except to seek medical care.
Certain foods: Food triggers vary from person to person. Still, common culprits that can trigger an IBS symptom flare-up include dairy, foods that contain gluten (like wheat) and foods/drinks known to make you gassy.
Adults who have contact with babies and young children should wash their hands after coughing, sneezing or wiping their nose.
How long is the common cold contagious?
Non-ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (NSTEMI): A less severe type of heart attack, where the blockage is partial or temporary, and there may be less damage to the heart muscle.
Alcohol use, alcohol withdrawal, recreational drug use.
Legionella pneumophila is a kind of Legionella bacteria.
Treatments that manage symptoms include:
Breast Cancer – highly prevalent in women
With the right care, congestive heart failure won’t stop you from doing the things you enjoy. Your prognosis, or outlook for the future, will depend on:
Management and Treatment
Chest X-ray.
A heart attack can damage the heart muscle, leading to heart failure, a condition in which the heart is unable to pump blood effectively.
Parkinson’s disease isn’t a condition you can self-diagnose, and you shouldn’t try to manage the symptoms without first talking to a healthcare provider.
What medicines do you take?
Reduce salt intake
Coronary artery disease:
Prevention
early diagnosis: being aware of signs and symptoms of breast cancer and the importance of seeking medical advice for abnormal findings, timely clinical evaluation and diagnosis and referral for treatment services; and
How can I reduce my risk or prevent this condition?
Some people discover that their seizures occur consistently during certain times of the day or around certain events or other factors. You may want to track your seizures — and the events around your seizures — to see if there’s a pattern.
If your symptoms suggest an ulcer, your provider will examine you and test for H. pylori infection. This might mean a breath test or stool test.
How long after exposure will I get the flu?
The first step in diagnosing IBS is a detailed medical history. Your provider will ask about your symptoms. They may ask:
Changes in your mood, behavior and personality
An oral medication (taken by mouth).
Blood test: To check for a digestive disease condition or another condition that may cause your symptoms.
This corresponds to 43% of adults aged 18 years and over (43% of men and 44% of women) who were overweight; this is an increase from 1990, when 25% of adults aged 18 years and over were overweight.
Treatments for Stages A and B.
A heart attack can increase the risk of blood clots that travel to the brain, causing a stroke.
A1c	Less than 5.7%.	5.7% to 6.4%.	6.5% or higher.
Loss of appetite
Stress Test:
vomiting
Species of Cryptococcus
Hoarseness.
Decide what to do next
3. Proton Therapy for Prostate Cancer at Apollo Hospitals
Inflammation of the lining around the heart (pericardium) can occur after a heart attack and cause chest pain.
contributing to what is now a global public health crisis with more than 1 billion people living with obesity and prevalence rising in nearly every country (1).
The possible causes are:
Other ways to reduce your risk of getting the flu include:
Diabetes-related ketoacidosis (DKA): This complication mainly affects people with Type 1 diabetes or undiagnosed T1D. It happens when your body doesn’t have enough insulin. If your body doesn’t have insulin, it can’t use glucose for energy, so it breaks down fat instead. This process eventually releases substances called ketones, which turn your blood acidic. This causes labored breathing, vomiting and loss of consciousness. DKA requires immediate medical treatment.
Alcohol.
Symptoms of asthma can vary from person to person. Symptoms sometimes get significantly worse. This is known as an asthma attack. Symptoms are often worse at night or during exercise.
Unusually soft speaking voice (hypophonia). This happens because of reduced muscle control in the throat and chest.
If you drink heavily, talk with your doctor. It’s confidential, and they can help you get your drinking under control to save your health.
How is the flu treated?
Diarrhea, constipation or alternating between the two.
Certain medications.
Burping
smoke or use tobacco
The main symptom of epilepsy is recurring seizures. Your symptoms, however, vary depending on the type of seizure you have.
haemorrhagic stroke: intracerebral haemorrhage (ICH) by rupture of a blood vessel in the brain leading to bleeding; and
Intensity-Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT)
The best way to prevent your baby from catching a cold is to keep them away from people who have colds. If possible, keep your baby home. A virus that causes a mild illness in an older child or an adult can cause a more serious one in an infant.
Walking pneumonia is a type of pneumonia that is less severe. Walking pneumonia patients may be unaware that they have the disease. It’s possible that their symptoms are more akin to a minor respiratory illness than pneumonia. Walking pneumonia, on the other hand, may necessitate a lengthier recuperation time.
abnormal heart rhythm
A migraine is a severe headache that causes throbbing, pulsing head pain on one side of your head. The headache phase of a migraine usually lasts at least four hours, but it can also last for days. This headache gets worse with:
Just about everyone gets gastroenteritis, likely more than once. Most of the time, it’s not serious. But in more vulnerable populations, it can be. Around the world, gastroenteritis is a leading cause of death.
Most of the time (in up to 70% of cases), the cause of seizures is not known. Known causes include:
Atonic seizures: Atonic means “without tone.” An atonic seizure means you’ve lost muscle control or your muscles are weak during your seizure. Parts of your body may droop or drop such as your eyelids or head, or you may fall to the ground during this short seizure (usually less than 15 seconds). This seizure type is sometimes called “drop seizure” or “drop attack.”
Regular screening for colorectal cancer (secondary prevention) is the best way to catch the disease early.
Lab tests
Biofeedback.
Be more physically active, which can include walking, running, swimming, dancing or activities that build strength, like lifting weights.
Brittle diabetes: Brittle diabetes is a form of Type 1 diabetes that’s marked by frequent and severe episodes of high and low blood sugar levels. This instability often leads to hospitalization. In rare cases, a pancreas transplant may be necessary to permanently treat brittle diabetes.
Practice proper food hygiene to prevent infections	Don't ignore persistent digestive issues or symptoms
and how quickly treatment is administered. With early intervention and proper management, many individuals recover and lead active lives.
Liver failure
Nausea, vomiting, or cold sweats may accompany chest pain, especially in women. These symptoms can often be mistaken for gastrointestinal issues.
chest pain;
Healthcare providers use different standards to set chronic viral hepatitis stages:
Your healthcare provider will ask you about your symptoms and medical history. They may ask you about:
Need to urinate while resting at night.
How is epilepsy diagnosed?
Will I always have seizures?
Persistent pain or stiffness in the pelvic region, lower back, hips, ribs, or upper thighs
Alzheimer’s disease affects everyone differently. But in general, it can weaken or completely eliminate your:
Monoclonal antibodies(erenumab, fremanezumab, galcanezumab).
The ketogenic diet and the modified Atkins diet — diets high in fat, moderate in protein and low in carbohydrates — are the two most common diets sometimes recommended for people with epilepsy. Diets are mostly recommended for children where medication was not effective and who aren’t candidates for surgery. Low glycemic index diets may also reduce seizures in some people with epilepsy.
External Beam Radiation Therapy (EBRT)
reducing tobacco use and limiting exposure to second-hand smoke;
Practicing good hygiene is one of the best ways to help prevent UTIs. This is especially important if you have a vagina because your urethra is much shorter, and it’s easier for E. coli to move from your rectum back into your body. Always wipe from front to back after a bowel movement (pooping) to avoid this.
Down syndrome caused by trisomy 21
sustainably-produced food at locally affordable prices spaces for physical activity and the absence of adequate legal and regulatory environments.
Other possible symptoms related to peptic ulcer disease include:
Stage A
Poor diet (high in salty, smoked foods)
Haemophilus influenza type B (Hib) causes pneumonia in children less than 5 years of age. It can also cause other infections like meningitis, and ear infections. However, due to Hib vaccinations, these infections are now less common.
Most of the time, medical treatment for gastroenteritis is supportive. That means the treatment supports your body’s natural healing process rather than curing gastroenteritis. It might include:
Change your clothing
Taking care of other medical conditions you have that can increase your risk.
Early symptoms may be mild or dismissed as common respiratory issues, leading to delayed diagnosis.
How is the flu diagnosed?
Stage A (pre-heart failure) means you’re at a high risk of developing heart failure because you have a family history of congestive heart failure or you have one or more of these medical conditions:
Common health consequences
Abdominal pain or discomfort: Cramping, pressure, or aching pain in the upper abdomen, which may worsen after eating.
Ureters. Your ureters are thin tubes that carry pee from your kidneys to your bladder.
What can I expect if I have IBS?
Differential Diagnosis: Myocardial infarction shares symptoms with other conditions, such as angina, gastrointestinal issues (e.g., acid reflux), and musculoskeletal pain. A thorough evaluation and diagnostic testing are required to differentiate between these conditions.
Other medical conditions you have.
What does a migraine feel like?
Stomach acid is powerful stuff, built to break down the food you eat for digestion. Your stomach has a tough inner lining to protect it from its own acid. But your other organs don’t have this protection.
Heavy metal poisoning.
Prevention and management
Gastroenteritis (Stomach Flu)
Keep a food diary. Your provider may recommend that you note the foods you eat to determine which foods trigger IBS flare-ups and then bring this to a nutritionist.
Alcohol use.
Breast cancers may spread to other areas of the body and trigger other symptoms. Often, the most common first detectable site of spread is to the lymph nodes under the arm although it is possible to have cancer-bearing lymph nodes that cannot be felt.
Since they have similar symptoms, the only way to know for sure if you have the flu or COVID-19 is to get tested. They both have a risk of serious illness. But different viruses cause these infections, and providers treat them with different medications.
Risk Factors
Pancreatic damage: Physical damage to your pancreas — from a condition, surgery or injury — can impact its ability to make insulin, resulting in Type 3c diabetes.
Related:
Many factors have been linked to an increased risk of developing asthma, although it is often difficult to find a single, direct cause.
Laboratory testing for arboviruses can be accomplished through either direct detection methods such as virus isolation, molecular detection of nucleic acid or antigen testing, including rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) within the first week of illness.
Secondary prevention for lung cancer involves screening methods that aim to detect the disease in its early stages, before symptoms become apparent and can be indicated for high-risk individuals. In this population, early detection can significantly increase the chances of successful treatment and improve outcomes. The primary screening method for lung cancer is low-dose computed tomography (LDCT).
Factors that may increase the risk of developing colorectal cancer include:
Cardiac catheterization.
If you develop diabetes complications.
Stuffy nose (nasal congestion).
If you get UTIs frequently, a healthcare provider may perform tests to check for other health issues — such as diabetes or an abnormal urinary system — that may contribute to your infections.
Breathing problems
Lung cancer can cause several symptoms that may indicate a problem in the lungs.
For children, age needs to be considered when defining overweight and obesity.
Researchers have found possible ways to test for possible indicators of Parkinson’s disease. Both of these new tests involve the alpha-synuclein protein but test for it in new, unusual ways. While these tests can’t tell you what conditions you have because of misfolded alpha-synuclein proteins, that information can still help your provider make a diagnosis.
Severe digestive tract infection.
Getting plenty of rest.
Liver damage.
While medicine can reduce the symptoms and the effects of GERD, it doesn’t stop it from happening. A severe case of GERD may continue to cause complications despite medication, even if you can’t feel it.
Spinal tap. One of these tests looks for misfolded alpha-synuclein proteins in cerebrospinal fluid, which is the fluid that surrounds your brain and spinal cord. This test involves a spinal tap (lumbar puncture), where a healthcare provider inserts a needle into your spinal canal to collect some cerebrospinal fluid for testing.
Cutting the nerve that triggers acid release (vagotomy)
secondhand smoke
Manage your stress.
Loss of appetite.
After treatment, regular follow-up visits and surveillance are essential to monitor for any signs of recurrence or new cancer. Surveillance may include physical examinations, blood tests, and imaging studies (such as CT scans) to detect any potential recurrence at an early stage.
What can I expect if I have the flu?
Parkinson’s disease happens for either genetic reasons or unpredictably. Neither is preventable, and you can’t reduce your risk of developing it. There are certain high-risk occupations such as farming and welding, but not everyone in these professions develops parkinsonism.
air pollution
Feeling like you’re unable to empty your bowels after pooping.
While the mutations themselves are often spontaneous, certain underlying factors may contribute to or increase the chance of these genetic changes, including:
What are the possible complications of chronic acid reflux (GERD)?
After recovery, people who have had dengue may experience fatigue for several weeks.
regularly checking blood pressure
ACE inhibitors including enalapril and lisinopril relax blood vessels and prevent kidney damage.
Healthcare providers commonly prescribe the following antibiotics to treat UTIs:
Treatment is based on the person, the type of cancer and its spread. Treatment combines surgery, radiation therapy and medications.
The role of cumulative sun exposure in the development of malignant melanoma is equivocal. However, malignant melanoma risk is higher in people with a history of non-melanoma skin cancers and of solar keratoses, both of which are indicators of cumulative UV exposure.
Asthma. Acid in your airways may aggravate existing asthma or cause asthma-like symptoms in people without any preexisting respiratory conditions. Tiny acid particles may irritate your bronchial tubes and cause them to contract, causing coughing and breathing difficulties.
Is the common cold contagious?
Sensitivity to touch (feeling like someone is touching you).
V	Naturally brown skin
Sort of. Every time you use antibiotics to treat a UTI, the infection adapts and can become harder to fight (antibiotic resistance). But the infection becomes immune to the antibiotics, not you. Antibiotics may not always be the best solution. As a result, a healthcare provider may suggest alternative treatments if you get frequent urinary tract infections. These may include:
obesity is greater than 2 standard deviations above the WHO Growth Reference median.
Secreting prostate-specific antigen (PSA), a protein that helps keep semen in a liquid state
Exercise regularly: Physical activity can help maintain a healthy weight and improve immune function, both of which are linked to a lower risk of prostate cancer.
With nowhere to go, the proteins build up in various places or in certain cells (tangles or clumps of these proteins are called Lewy bodies). The buildup of these Lewy bodies (which doesn’t happen with some of the genetic problems that cause Parkinson’s disease) causes toxic effects and cell damage.
Diet therapy
Feel increased agitation, paranoia or hallucinations
Candidiasis.
Need an Appointment?Click here
A migraine can feel different for each person. A migraine headache ranges from mild to severe. Head pain can start on one side and shift to the opposite side. You may also have pain around your eyes or temple, and sometimes, around your face, sinuses, jaw or neck.
a low-grade fever
Non-melanoma skin cancers comprise basal cell carcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas. These are rarely lethal but surgical treatment is painful and often disfiguring. The temporal trends of the incidence of non-melanoma skin cancers are difficult to determine, because reliable registration of these cancers has not been achieved. However, specific studies carried out in Australia, Canada and the United States, indicate that between the 1960s and the 1980s the prevalence of non-melanoma skin cancers increased by a factor of more than two.
How does the flu spread?
What can I do to feel better?
Radiation therapy uses high-energy rays to kill or shrink cancer cells. It is not often used as the primary treatment for stomach cancer but may be helpful in certain situations:
Alcohol Consumption: Excessive alcohol consumption can damage the stomach lining, increase inflammation, and potentially lead to the development of gastric cancer over time.
Focal onset seizures start in one area, or network of cells, on one side of your brain. This seizure used to be called partial onset seizure. There are two types of focal seizures:
Stomach pain
Over time, cancerous cells may spread to other organs including the lungs, liver, brain and bones. Once they reach these sites, new cancer-related symptoms such as bone pain or headaches may appear.
Resting in a dark, quiet, cool room.
Medications specifically used to treat IBS include:
Prostate cancer, when detected early, is highly treatable. If diagnosed before it spreads beyond the prostate, the 5-year survival rate can be as high as 99%. However, once metastasized to distant organs, the survival rate drops significantly, to around 29%. This makes early diagnosis and timely treatment absolutely vital.
Other UTI-associated symptoms may include:
It is important for people with asthma to know how to increase their treatment when their symptoms are worsening to avoid a serious attack. Healthcare providers may give an asthma action plan to help people with asthma to take greater control of their treatment.
Fatigue: Unexplained tiredness or weakness, often due to nutrient malabsorption or the effects of the cancer.
The flu is one of the most common infectious diseases. Every flu season, about 20 to 40 million people in the U.S. catch the flu.
High blood pressure in the liver
Pneumococcal Vaccine: This vaccine protects the individual from serious infections of Streptococcus pneumonia. Two types of pneumococcal vaccine are available. These are the pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine(PPSV23) and pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV 13).
Tests include:
tobacco use; and
Other risk factors to avoid include:
Causes of Prostate Cancer
Types of congestive heart failure include:
Providers can treat the flu with antiviral medications under certain circumstances. Antivirals can reduce your risk of severe illness and shorten the amount of time you’re sick. Many people can treat the flu without prescription medications. Providers prescribe antivirals if you:
Breast cancer is a disease in which abnormal breast cells grow out of control and form tumours. If left unchecked, the tumours can spread throughout the body and become fatal.
The risk of a heart attack increases with age, especially for individuals over the age of 45 for men and 55 for women. As people age, the blood vessels tend to become less flexible, and the buildup of plaque in the arteries increases.
Your prior response to anti-seizure medications.
Treatment
Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia): Feeling like food is stuck in the chest or throat, especially if the cancer is near the stomach-esophagus junction.
Can gastroenteritis be prevented?
Fever.
Pneumonia can be characterized according to the part of the lungs it affects:
Lifestyle changes to help prevent colorectal cancer include:
These rare subtypes tend to be more aggressive and require specialized treatment approaches.
drink plenty of liquids;
Your age (AD usually affects people older than 65)
Damage to the kidneys, heart, and liver – These organs can be injured if they don’t get enough oxygen or if the immune system reacts too strongly to the infection.
Simple fatty liver: This means you have fat in your liver, but you may not have any inflammation in your liver or damage to your liver cells. It usually doesn’t get worse or cause problems with your liver. Most people with MASLD have simple fatty liver.
How do you catch gastroenteritis infections?
Prevalence of overweight varied by region, from 31% in the WHO South-East Asia Region and the African Region to 67% in the Region of the Americas.
Inhaled medicines that open and reduce swelling in the airways are the main treatments.
weak muscles and brittle bones
Intravenous (IV) treatment. In some complicated cases, a UTI may be resistant to antibiotics, or the infection may move to your kidneys. You may need treatment at a hospital, where providers will give you medicine through a needle they insert into a vein, usually in your arm (intravenously). Once you return home, you may need to take oral antibiotics for a period to rid yourself of the infection completely.
Eat more vegetables and fruits.
The risk of colorectal cancer increases with age. Most cases affect people over 50 years old.
The tissue is graded using the Gleason score, which helps predict how likely the tumor is to grow or spread.
This stage is often associated with more serious complications and systemic symptoms such as fatigue, bone pain, or weight loss.
Management and Treatment
Insulin resistance: Type 2 diabetes mainly results from insulin resistance. Insulin resistance happens when cells in your muscles, fat and liver don’t respond as they should to insulin. Several factors and conditions contribute to varying degrees of insulin resistance, including obesity, lack of physical activity, diet, hormonal imbalances, genetics and certain medications.
Massaging your scalp.
Hospitalized individuals: Hospitalisation increases the risk of exposure to micro-organisms, especially in those who require a ventilator.
However, it’s important to know that you can live a healthy life with diabetes. The following are key to a better prognosis:
Symptoms
Other transmission modes
Back to video
Persistent lower back or pelvic pain
While there is no guaranteed way to prevent prostate cancer, certain lifestyle changes may help lower your risk and support overall prostate health:
What are Alzheimer’s disease treatments?
What’s the outlook for Parkinson’s disease?
miss or share medication.
Genetic mutations (e.g., Lynch syndrome)
This involves drugs that specifically target molecular changes in cancer cells. Still under research for prostate cancer, targeted therapy may be used in selected cases with identifiable genetic mutations.
Inherited genetic mutations (e.g., BRCA1, BRCA2, or genes linked to Lynch syndrome)
Type 1 diabetes: This type is an autoimmune disease in which your immune system attacks and destroys insulin-producing cells in your pancreas for unknown reasons. Up to 10% of people who have diabetes have Type 1. It’s usually diagnosed in children and young adults, but it can develop at any age.
Which treatments are best for me?
Ear infections.
Microscopic traces of poop can linger on bathroom surfaces, diaper changing areas and people’s hands if they don’t wash well. These traces can transfer to others who touch them, or to their food or water.
Stage A treatment
Persistent dizziness.
overweight is a BMI greater than or equal to 25; and
Obesity, especially abdominal obesity, is a major risk factor for heart disease. Lack of physical activity leads to weight gain, high blood pressure, and increased cholesterol levels, all of which are linked to a higher risk of heart attacks.
cancers, neurological disorders, chronic respiratory diseases, and digestive disorders (3).
Weight tracking every day. Tell your healthcare provider if you gain or lose more than 4 pounds.
Infection with the adenovirus or coronavirus
Cancer is confined to a small area within the prostate.
Fever, chills, and sweating
In your seizure diary, note the time of day each seizure happened, the events or special circumstances happening around the time of the seizure and how you felt. If you suspect you’ve identified a trigger, track that trigger to find out if it’s really a trigger. For example, if you think caffeine is a seizure trigger, do you have a seizure after consuming every caffeinated food or beverage, after “x” number of caffeinated foods/beverages or at certain times of day after consuming caffeine? Caffeine may or may not be the trigger when thoroughly reviewed.
High-output heart failure. This is a rare type of congestive heart failure.
Gastroenteritis happens when your immune system activates to defend your stomach and intestines from harm. It sends inflammatory cells to help fight infections and repair injured tissues.
Drink plenty of water. Drink at least eight 8-ounce glasses of water a day (2 liters). Water keeps your GI tract lubricated and can help treat or prevent constipation.
Outpatient Convenience – No hospital stay needed in most cases
Can you get a UTI from fingers?
Abdominal swelling and tenderness
Genetic mutations: Certain genetic mutations can cause MODY and neonatal diabetes.
Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) – Pneumonia obtained outside of a medical or institutional setting is referred to as this.
Reducing abdominal pressure. Wear loose-fitting clothes or consider losing weight if you have overweight/obesity. This can help in the short term and the long term.
Blood tests (these can help rule out other forms of parkinsonism).
Gender (more common in men)
Chills.
Language
What’s the difference between GERD and stomach ulcers?
Missed anti-seizure medication doses.
2. Alcohol-related fatty liver disease (ALD)
The following symptoms can be signs of stroke:
Fungal gastroenteritis
An ECG records the electrical activity of the heart and can detect abnormalities in heart rhythm or signs of heart damage caused by a heart attack.
Diabetes.
Rice or porridge.
General onset seizures affect a widespread network of cells on both sides of your brain at the same time. There are six types of generalized seizures.
Additional Imaging to Determine Cancer Stage
To lower your risk of traumatic brain injury (from blows to your head), always wear your seatbelt when driving and drive “defensively”; wear a helmet when biking; clear your floors of clutter and power cords to prevent falls; and stay off ladders.
Coronary Angiography:
Over-the-counter (OTC) supplements — including cranberry extract and probiotics — may also help prevent UTIs. Talk to a healthcare provider before you start taking any supplements.
buzzing in the ears
Having a first-degree relative (father, brother, or son) with prostate cancer doubles or triples your risk.
dizziness
Migraine without aura (common migraine).
Most people are able to manage flu symptoms at home and recover within a few days to a week. Because it can cause severe illness, it’s important to keep an eye on your symptoms and get medical attention if you need it. This is especially important if you have an underlying health condition.
How long is the flu contagious?
persistent motor deficits and gait disturbances (abnormalities in movement and walking pattern)
Researchers are exploring other possible treatments that could help with Parkinson’s disease. While these aren’t widely available, they do offer hope to people with this condition. Some of the experimental treatment approaches include:
urinary incontinence
Properly managing diabetes, high blood pressure, and high cholesterol can help reduce the risk of myocardial infarction.
Acute complications (that appear within days to weeks) are:
After smoking or drinking alcohol.
It’s important to talk to your healthcare provider if you or your child has these symptoms.
diabetes (high blood sugar)
The number of adults with hypertension increased from 650 million in 1990 to 1.4 billion in 2024, with the increase seen largely in low- and middle-income countries. This increase is due mainly to a rise in the number of older adults in those countries.
Do you have pain related to bowel movements?
Obesity: Being overweight or obese has been associated with a higher risk of developing stomach cancer, particularly in the upper part of the stomach (cardia). Obesity can lead to chronic inflammation and increase the likelihood of conditions that can promote cancer growth.
Severe infections: Some people get diagnosed with IBS after a severe infection affecting their GI tract, suggesting germs may play a role.
Definition of overweight and obesity
Eating foods that are good for your heart.
a dry cough that lasts more than a week
lifestyle factors: unhealthy lifestyle choices, such as a diet high in processed meats and low in fruits and vegetables, sedentary behaviour, obesity, smoking and excessive alcohol consumption, can increase the risk.
3. Infertility
coils and vaporizers.
Management and Treatment
Chronic high blood sugar can cause severe complications, which are usually irreversible. Several studies have shown that untreated chronic high blood sugar shortens your lifespan and worsens your quality of life.
Gastroenteritis affects your stomach and intestines, causing symptoms like nausea, vomiting and diarrhea.
Prostate cancer often develops silently in its early stages and may not produce noticeable symptoms for years. This is why routine screening is crucial, especially for men over 50 or those at higher risk. When symptoms do occur, they are often related to urinary or reproductive function, due to the prostate’s location around the urethra.
6. Immunotherapy
Viral hepatitis can lead to more serious issues like:
The risk of colorectal cancer can be reduced by eating a healthy diet, staying physically active, not smoking tobacco and limiting alcohol. Regular screenings are crucial for early detection.
Prevention
Blood in your pee (hematuria).
In accordance with WHO guidelines, detection of MDR-TB requires bacteriological confirmation of TB and testing for drug resistance using rapid molecular tests or culture methods.
What specific antibiotics are used to treat a urinary tract infection?
With so many symptoms in common, it can be hard to tell the difference between a cold and the flu. Here’s how to tell which is which.
See a healthcare provider if you or a loved one are experiencing issues with memory or thinking. They can determine if the issues are due to Alzheimer’s or another condition.
Is sleepier than usual.
ensuring the availability of healthy food choices and supporting regular physical activity practice in the workplace.
Thorough and frequent washing of hands
watch for severe symptoms and contact your doctor as soon as possible if you notice any.
Fatigue
Parasite infections cause parasitic gastroenteritis. Common parasite infections include:
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of IBS can appear frequently. Or, they may occur during flare-ups. In other words, you don’t always experience symptoms. Instead, symptoms may go away (and you’ll have normal bowel movements). At other times, symptoms return.
Is there a cure for IBS?
The risk of mosquito infection is positively associated with high viremia and high fever in the patient; conversely, high levels of DENV-specific antibodies are associated with a decreased risk of mosquito infection. Most people are viremic for about 4–5 days, but viremia can last as long as 12 days.
Aldosterone antagonist if you’ve had a heart attack or if you have an EF of 35% or less.
You can’t prevent autoimmune and genetic forms of diabetes. But there are some steps you can take to lower your risk for developing prediabetes, Type 2 diabetes and gestational diabetes, including:
Medications to treat symptoms like nausea and diarrhea, in certain cases.
Take your medication as prescribed. Taking your medications can make a huge difference in the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. You should take your medications as prescribed and talk to your provider if you notice side effects or start to feel like your medications aren't as effective.
trouble swallowing (dysphagia)
Change your peeing habits
Weak immune system: People with severe underlying health conditions like HIV/AIDS, those who have had an organ transplant, those on chemotherapy regimen or long-term usage of steroids are at higher risk for pneumonia.
Endoscopy (Gastroscopy): This is one of the primary methods for diagnosing stomach cancer. A flexible tube with a light and camera (endoscope) is inserted through the mouth to examine the stomach lining. The doctor can look for abnormal areas and take biopsies (tissue samples) for further analysis.
After surgery (Adjuvant chemotherapy): To kill any remaining cancer cells and reduce the risk of recurrence.
Shortness of breath (if lungs are affected)
Jaundice (if the liver is involved)
Is Alzheimer’s disease hereditary?
Oseltamivir phosphate (Tamiflu®). You take oseltamivir by mouth as a pill or a liquid. You usually take it for several days.
Using hand sanitizers: When you can’t wash your hands with soap and water, use alcohol-based hand sanitizer.
From January to July 2025, over 4 million cases and over 3000 deaths have been reported to WHO from 97 countries.
A trigger is something that causes symptoms to start. Some of the most common migraine triggers include:
80% to 90% for one year.
Due to the increased risk for heart disease, it’s also important to maintain a healthy:
Weight.
Sleep problems such as periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD), rapid eye movement (REM) behavior disorder and restless legs syndrome.
Several processes can cause the airways to become narrow and lead to COPD. There may be destruction of parts of the lung, mucus blocking the airways, and inflammation and swelling of the airway lining.
We call colds “common” because as their name implies, they’re widespread. You’ll probably have more colds in your lifetime than any other illness. Adults catch two to three colds a year, while young children come down with a cold four or more times a year.
Sudden dizziness, lightheadedness, or fainting.
You’re pregnant and have a fever or other flu symptoms.
As your healthcare provider learns more, your seizure type may change to focal or generalized onset seizure.
feeling weak.
Certain factors increase the risk of breast cancer including increasing age, obesity, harmful use of alcohol, family history of breast cancer, history of radiation exposure, reproductive history (such as age that menstrual periods began and age at first pregnancy), tobacco use and postmenopausal hormone therapy. Approximately half of breast cancers develop in women who have no identifiable breast cancer risk factor other than gender (female) and age (over 40 years).
age
Quinolones, such as ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin.
Amoxicillin.
Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy (SBRT)
Regularly undergo screenings and check-ups if at risk	Avoid excessive use of certain pain relievers, like NSAIDs
The flu and the common cold can have similar symptoms, like runny nose and cough. But cold symptoms are usually mild and flu symptoms can be severe and lead to serious complications. Different viruses cause colds and the flu.
Avoid beverages that contain alcohol. Alcohol puts stress on your liver.
Follow a healthy eating plan. Eating a variety of nutritious foods can help maintain your brain and overall health. Your provider might suggest you follow a specific eating plan like the Mediterranean or DASH diet.
Bone Scan – to detect spread to bones, especially in cases with bone pain or high PSA
A family history of heart disease or sudden death.
Black men have the highest risk of developing prostate cancer and are more likely to develop aggressive forms of the disease.
Medical procedures for larger stones (e.g., shock wave therapy or surgery)
pyrazinamide; and
If infected, you’ll usually get symptoms of the flu one to four days after exposure (incubation period).
NSAID overuse: These common pain relievers (like aspirin and ibuprofen) are easy to get. But using them too often can upset the chemical balance in your stomach and duodenum.
After surgery: To kill any remaining cancer cells that might not have been removed.
Connective tissue diseases. Diseases like scleroderma may affect your esophagus muscles.
Dicyclomine (Bentyl®).
Seizures.
Dairy products.
Anti-seizure medications
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I) or angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) if your EF is 40% or lower.
Coronary angiography involves injecting a contrast dye into the coronary arteries and taking X-ray images to identify blockages or narrowing in the arteries.
Prostate Cancer – common in men
Get adequate sleep (typically 7 to 9 hours) and seek treatment for sleep disorders.
weight loss with no known cause
Cloudy, foul-smelling pee.
You may need imaging procedures to rule out conditions involving inflammation or abnormal growths in your GI tract.
Nausea and vomiting that occur alongside chest pain.
A stuffy nose.
COPD should be suspected if a person has typical symptoms, and the diagnosis confirmed by a breathing test called spirometry, which measures how the lungs are working. In low- and middle-income countries, spirometry is often not available and so the diagnosis may be missed.
Diagnosis and Tests
Spatial understanding
Nephropathy, which can lead to kidney failure or the need for dialysis or transplant.
Kidney Stones – increasing with lifestyle & diet changes
abdominal cramps, pain or bloating that won’t go away
Oral health issues, such as gum (periodontal) disease.
Fermented or pickled foods.
Regular exercise, such as walking every day.
Is the flu contagious?
Prevention
Non‑modifiable risk factors are:
Aldosterone antagonist.
An echocardiogram uses sound waves to create images of the heart’s structure and function. It can show areas of the heart that are not contracting properly due to a lack of blood flow.
What happens in your brain when you have epilepsy?
How long congestive heart failure lasts
Antidepressants. These drugs can treat anxiety, restlessness, mood swings and depression.
Common preventive migraine medications include:
Chest pain
If your child has any of the following symptoms, call their healthcare provider. These symptoms could mean that your child has something more serious than a cold:
Skin biopsy. Another possible test involves a biopsy of surface nerve tissue. A biopsy includes collecting a small sample of your skin, including the nerves in the skin. The samples come from a spot on your back and two spots on your leg. Analyzing the samples can help determine if your alpha-synuclein has a certain kind of malfunction that could increase the risk of developing Parkinson’s disease.
Stroke:
chemotherapy
Tonic-clonic seizures: This seizure type is a combination of muscle stiffness (tonic) and repeated, rhythmic muscle jerking (clonic). Healthcare providers may call this seizure a convulsion, and once called it a grand mal seizure. Tonic-clonic seizures are what most people think of when they hear the word “seizure.” You lose consciousness, fall to the ground, your muscles stiffen and jerk for one to five minutes. You may bite your tongue, drool and lose muscle control of bowels or bladder, making you poop or pee.
What tests will be done to diagnose a urinary tract infection?
This advanced imaging helps identify suspicious areas within the prostate and assess cancer spread, using a PIRADS score to grade risk.
Pneumonia is frequently caused by respiratory viruses. Pneumonia can be caused by a variety of viral infections, including:
Clinical Trials
Chickenpox is a disease caused by chickens (varicella-zoster virus)
not being physically active
Some people with TB disease do not have any symptoms but can still spread TB.
What triggers a migraine?
Live with or care for people who are at risk for severe complications of the flu.
Regular Exercise:
Sneezing.
Gastroenteritis means inflammation in your stomach and intestine. Inflammation makes these organs feel swollen and sore. It causes symptoms of illness, like nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and diarrhea.
You have a higher risk if you have an H. pylori infection, take NSAIDs often, or both. Other things, like smoking, alcohol and certain medications, can contribute to your risk.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan.
Cardiac computed tomography (CT).
Faster heart rate and/or breathing.
Brain infections. Infections can include brain abscess, meningitis, encephalitis and neurocysticercosis.
Pneumonia is further divided into categories based on how or where it was acquired:
Headache: A migraine headache lasts between four hours to 72 hours.
Management and Treatment
Exercising regularly.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
A diuretic (“water pill”) if symptoms continue.
High intake of salt, protein, or oxalate-rich foods
Antipyeretics: When a person is experiencing discomfort due to fever and pain during the infection, medications to reduce fever and pain, like paracetamol, are prescribed.
What is Parkinson’s disease?
Major risk factors: Smoking, high cholesterol, high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity, lack of exercise, poor diet, and family history.
Rectal bleeding.
Individuals with certain genetic risk factors (e.g., BRCA mutations, Lynch syndrome)
If cancer is confirmed, imaging tests may be used to assess the extent of spread (metastasis):
Upset stomach, waves of heat or cold, goosebumps.
Viral hepatitis causes
Confusion.
Common Symptoms
Robot-Assisted Laparoscopic Prostatectomy
Follow medical advice if you have recurrent stones
Nausea. Acid overflow or backwash may make you feel queasy or make you lose your appetite. Although you may have eaten a while ago, it may feel like there’s still more food to digest.
What is congestive heart failure?
Brain scans: Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to look for such things as tumors, infections or blood vessel abnormalities.
Is vomiting.
Living With
Stage 4: Advanced or Metastatic Prostate Cancer
Symptoms and Causes
Hormonal changes.
In a typical flu season in the U.S., it’s estimated that between 20,000 and 50,000 people die from the flu. Another 300,000 to 500,000 require hospitalization for serious illness.
Early-Stage Symptoms
Self-care
Beta-blocker.
Individuals with obesity, as they may develop more aggressive forms
Maternal transmission
fever; and
Doctors from several disciplines often work together to provide treatment and care of people with lung cancer.
Find and treat H. pylori. Most people don’t know they have it. A simple breath test can detect it. If you’ve had it before, consider retesting. It can come back.
Migraine symptoms
There are five known types of viral hepatitis. The most common types are hepatitis A, hepatitis B and hepatitis C:
Have a condition that causes issues with muscle function or makes it difficult to cough, swallow or clear fluids from your airways.
This type used to be called nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). It is very common in the U.S., affecting 1 in 3 adults. Researchers aren't exactly sure what causes it, but having obesity or metabolic disorders such as insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, central obesity, and hypertension will increase your risk of getting it. Unlike the other main type, you don't get it from drinking alcohol. There are two forms of MASLD:
Staying home: To make sure you don’t spread the cold to others, stay home when you’re sick.
Since then, the average life expectancy has increased by about 55%, rising to more than 14.5 years. That, combined with the fact that Parkinson’s diagnosis is much more likely after age 60, means this condition doesn’t often affect your life expectancy by more than a few years (depending on the life expectancy in your country).
Tuberculosis disease is treated with special antibiotics. Treatment is recommended for both TB infection and disease.
Blood Tests: While there is no specific blood test to diagnose stomach cancer, certain blood tests can provide valuable information. These tests can help assess general health, detect anemia (common in stomach cancer), or indicate the presence of tumor markers (such as CEA or CA 19-9) that may be elevated in some patients with stomach cancer.
personal history: individuals who have had colorectal cancer before or certain types of polyps are at a higher risk; and
Loss of sense of smell (anosmia).
Can I prevent a urinary tract infection?
Do's	Don't
Gestational diabetes: You typically won’t notice symptoms of gestational diabetes. Your healthcare provider will test you for gestational diabetes between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy.
Headache.
Flexible sigmoidoscopy: Similar to a colonoscopy, except a provider inserts a scope that allows them to view the lining of your rectum and the lower part of your colon only.
Transmission through the mosquito bite
The frequency of a migraine varies from person to person. You might have one migraine per year or one per week. On average, most people experience two to four per month. They’re most common in the morning. Most migraines are unpredictable, but sometimes, you can have an idea of when a migraine will happen, like before menstruation or after feeling stress.
Pain medication
Bladder. Your bladder is a balloon-like organ that stores pee before it leaves your body.
Increased hunger and thirst.
Good handwashing. Good handwashing is one of the most important and easiest ways to protect yourself and others from infections. Lathering with soap for at least 20 seconds removes germs and toxins from your hands that might transfer to your mouth or to other people.
Treatment for high blood pressure (medication, low-sodium diet, active lifestyle).
Hypertension is diagnosed if, when it is measured on two different days, the systolic blood pressure readings on both days is ≥140 mmHg and/or the diastolic blood pressure readings on both days is ≥90 mmHg.
The urinary tract makes and stores pee. It includes your:
For those who have been infected with pneumonia, getting plenty of rest, staying hydrated and taking medicines as prescribed can help decrease the risk of complications and aid in speedy recovery.
The prognosis for myocardial infarction depends on the severity of the heart attack, the extent of heart damage,
Mycoplasma
Esophagram. An esophagram is a type of X-ray exam. It takes moving X-rays (fluoroscopy) of your esophagus while you swallow. For the test, you swallow a chalky liquid called barium.
Smoking
Body aches.
The potential for interaction with other medications you take.
Imaging tests
Using an inhaler can be difficult, especially for children and during emergency situations. Using a spacer device makes it easier to use an aerosol inhaler. This helps the medicine to reach the lungs more easily. A spacer is a plastic container with a mouthpiece or mask at one end and a hole for the inhaler in the other. A homemade spacer, made from a 500ml plastic bottle, can be as effective as commercially manufactured spacers.
Rising PSA levels – often the earliest and most reliable sign
Treatment for breast cancer depends on the subtype of cancer and how much it has spread outside of the breast to lymph nodes (stages II or III) or to other parts of the body (stage IV).octors combine treatments to minimize the chances of the cancer coming back (recurrence). These include:
Who does epilepsy affect?
Tuberculosis (TB)
History of abuse.
Stiff neck.
Fasting blood glucose test	Less than 100.	100 to 125.	126 or higher.
Risk factors
A further factor is the lack of an effective health system response to identify excess weight gain and fat deposition at an early stage.
2. Curative Treatment Options
Diagnostics and treatment
Sapovirus.
Colorectal cancer often has no symptoms in the early stages. Regular screenings are important to catch the disease early and begin treatment.
Fatigue or weakness
Insulin: People with Type 1 diabetes need to inject synthetic insulin to live and manage diabetes. Some people with Type 2 diabetes also require insulin. There are several different types of synthetic insulin. They each start to work at different speeds and last in your body for different lengths of time. The four main ways you can take insulin include injectable insulin with a syringe (shot), insulin pens, insulin pumps and rapid-acting inhaled insulin.
In some cases, surgery may be recommended for metastatic colorectal cancer to remove tumours that are causing symptoms or blocking the intestine. Localized treatments, such as radiofrequency ablation, cryoablation, or radiation therapy, may be used to treat specific areas of metastasis, such as liver metastases. Radiation therapy may be used to help control the disease and manage symptoms, such as pain or bleeding.
occupational exposure to dusts, fumes or chemicals;
Charts and tables: WHO growth reference for children aged between 5–19 years
How do you get a urinary tract infection?
Symptoms of Gastric (Stomach) Cancer
Nitrofurantoin.
PSA (Prostate-Specific Antigen) Blood Test
avoid non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication such as ibuprofen and aspirin; and
Bacterial infection.
What is the medical treatment for GERD?
Weight gain.
Chemotherapy drugs.
Bacterial gastroenteritis
Beta-blocker if you’ve had a heart attack and your EF is 40% or lower (if you aren’t already taking one).
Lobar pneumonia – One or more lobes of your lungs are affected by lobar pneumonia. Lungs are divided into lobes, which are distinct regions of the lung. Based on how far illness has progressed, lobar pneumonia can be categorized into four stages:
How common are urinary tract infections?
Physical Examination: A physical exam may reveal signs of a heart attack, such as abnormal heart sounds, low blood pressure, or swelling in the legs.
Medications (to control cholesterol, blood pressure, clots)
At the first sign of symptoms.
Take medications as directed by your healthcare provider to manage existing risk factors for heart disease.
Researchers aren’t sure of the exact cause of migraines, but studies show genetics play a role.
Beta-blockers (atenolol, propranolol, nadolol).
Complications/side effects of the treatment
Regular check-ups for at-risk individuals: People with a family history of gastric cancer or those from regions where H. pylori infection is common may benefit from regular screening for the infection.
Increase fiber intake: A high-fiber diet, particularly from whole grains, may protect against stomach cancer by promoting a healthy digestive system.
Early-stage cancers
Treatments include:
Neuron-repair treatments. These treatments try to repair damaged neurons and encourage new neurons to form.
Some of the most common food triggers include:
There are four phases or stages of a migraine:
Clinical trials offer opportunities to access novel treatments or experimental therapies for patients. Participation in clinical trials helps advance medical knowledge and potentially offers new treatment options.
Administered orally or intravenously
Esophagus: From chronic inflammation (esophagitis), often a result of acid reflux (GERD). Other causes include infections, medications or autoimmune diseases.
Cranberry juice that you can buy at the grocery store doesn’t prevent a UTI. However, cranberry extract supplements (vitamin pills) may decrease your chances of getting a UTI.
Smoking
Having the APOE ε4 gene increases your risk of developing Alzheimer’s. It’s also associated with developing AD at a younger age (an earlier age of onset). But not everyone who has the APOE ε4 gene will get Alzheimer’s. It’s just one factor that can increase your risk.
dimpling, redness, pitting or other changes in the skin
Unexplained weight loss.
Type 1 diabetes: Symptoms of T1D can develop quickly — over a few weeks or months. You may develop additional symptoms that are signs of a severe complication called diabetes-related ketoacidosis (DKA). DKA is life-threatening and requires immediate medical treatment. DKA symptoms include vomiting, stomach pains, fruity-smelling breath and labored breathing.
Had a blank stare.
Pneumonia symptoms do not alter by trimester. However, due to other discomforts you may be experiencing, you may notice some of them later in your pregnancy. If you’re expecting a child, call your doctor as soon as you see symptoms of pneumonia. Premature birth and low birth weight are two issues that can arise from maternal pneumonia.
Runny or stuffy nose (congestion).
Diagnosis and Tests
Mucus in your poop (may look whitish).
Beta-blockers reduce the heart’s workload by lowering heart rate and blood pressure, improving heart function after a heart attack.
nausea
So many things contribute to acid reflux that it can be hard to tell what’s causing yours. Sometimes, simple lifestyle changes can make it go away. But some causes, like a hiatal hernia, may get worse.
Used for advanced prostate cancer that has spread beyond the gland or doesn’t respond to hormone therapy.
Tuberculosis is preventable and curable.
Using spray or oral decongestants like phenylephrine or pseudoephedrine can help with a runny or stuffy nose.
Go to the ER or seek immediate medical attention if you have symptoms of severe illness, including:
Prevention
Cancer cells can enter the bloodstream, allowing them to reach distant parts of the body such as the bones, lungs, or liver. Bone metastasis is one of the most common complications of advanced prostate cancer, often causing pain or fractures.
When a stroke is suspected, it should be treated as a health emergency. Rapid care is essential. Immediate diagnostic imagining (a CT or MRI scan) should be carried out as soon as possible.
Get at least 150 minutes per week of moderate-intensity aerobic activity or 75 minutes per week of vigorous aerobic activity.
When amyloid and tau proteins build up in your brain, they slowly kill neurons. This causes permanent damage that leads to Alzheimer’s symptoms. Nerve cell death starts in one area of your brain and then spreads to other areas. It’s most common for Alzheimer’s to begin in the area of your brain that controls memory — your hippocampus.
Age (50+)
Prevention
If you’re postmenopausal, a healthcare provider may suggest a vaginal cream that contains estrogen. These creams may help reduce your risk of developing a UTI by changing the pH of your vagina. Talk to a healthcare provider if you’re postmenopausal and get a lot of UTIs.
What tests will be done to diagnose this condition?
Incidence rates of colorectal cancer have been decreasing in high-income countries, largely as a result of effective screening programmes. The prognosis for colorectal cancer varies depending on the stage at diagnosis. Early-stage cancers have higher survival rates than advanced-stage cancers. Timely diagnosis, appropriate treatment, and regular follow-up care are important for improving survival rates and quality of life.
Diagnosis
Difficulty breathing.
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT).
eyes – sudden vision loss
Is gastroenteritis contagious?
Species of histoplasmosis
How can I prevent diabetes?
Have a BMI greater than 30 (have obesity).
Myoclonic seizures: This seizure type causes brief, shock-like muscle jerks or twitches (“myo” means muscle, “clonus” means muscle jerking). Myoclonic seizures usually last only a couple of seconds.
Alcohol overuse.
An abnormal build-up of proteins in your brain causes Alzheimer’s disease. Specifically, two proteins called amyloid and tau.
STIs such as chlamydia or gonorrhea may cause inflammation of the prostate, potentially increasing cancer risk. However, this link is not yet fully established.
Can viral hepatitis be prevented?
Stomach cancer, also known as gastric cancer, is a serious and potentially life-threatening disease that affects the cells lining the stomach. It is one of the most common types of cancer worldwide, with a higher incidence in certain regions and populations. To understand stomach cancer, it is important to have an overview of its characteristics and risk factors.
Types of Prostate Cancer
Jejunum: After gastric bypass surgery, the middle part of your small intestine becomes your new duodenum. But it doesn’t have the same protective lining.
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) to lower acid and protect your lining
Who does it affect?
How is a migraine diagnosed?
What medications treat migraines?
Contact a healthcare provider if you have any of the following symptoms:
Important Note
Living With
Making sure you’re up to date on your colon cancer screening.
Since the urethra passes through the prostate, any enlargement or abnormality in the gland—whether benign or cancerous—can affect the flow of urine. This is why symptoms such as difficulty urinating or increased frequency are commonly associated with prostate issues.
Taking vitamins, minerals or herbs like riboflavin (vitamin B2), magnesium, feverfew, butterbur or co-enzyme Q10.
Maintain a balanced diet
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Since most children can’t blow their nose until about age 4, the following methods may help ease your baby’s stuffy nose:
Taking an antacid. If you don’t have one, Pepto Bismol® might work.
Prediabetes: This type is the stage before Type 2 diabetes. Your blood glucose levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be officially diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes.
If anti-seizure medications don’t control your seizures, your healthcare provider will discuss other treatment options, including special diets, medical devices or surgery.
If the treatment improves or stops your symptoms, you still need to continue treatment to slow the progression to Stage D.
In the early stages, prostate cancer symptoms may be subtle or mistaken for benign conditions such as Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH) or prostatitis. Common signs include:
Petroleum jelly: Dab petroleum jelly on the outside of your baby’s nostrils to reduce irritation. Don’t block the inside of your baby’s nostrils. (Unless their provider recommends it, don’t use nasal sprays on your baby. They may work for a bit but will make their congestion worse with continued use.)
Left-sided heart failure.
radiotherapy (radiation)
Steroid pills and antibiotics are often used to treat flare-ups.
Parkinson’s disease can take years or even decades to cause severe effects. In 1967, two experts, Margaret Hoehn and Melvin Yahr, created the staging system for Parkinson’s disease. That staging system is no longer in widespread use because staging this condition is less helpful than determining how it affects each person’s life individually and then treating them accordingly.
Malnutrition.
Call your baby’s healthcare provider or go to the nearest emergency room if your baby:
Kidney disease.
Burning or painful sensation while urinating
There are several types of migraines. The most common migraine categories are:
About a quarter of the global population is estimated to have been infected with TB bacteria. In general, people with TB infection don’t feel sick and are not contagious. About 5–10% of people infected with TB will eventually get symptoms and develop TB disease. Babies and children are at higher risk of developing the disease if they are infected.
If you have Alzheimer’s, your body makes too much glutamate, which damages your brain’s cells. NMDA antagonists block or fill up the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors glutamate binds to in your brain. This can slow down how fast Alzheimer’s progresses.
Difficulty breathing (especially if your baby’s or child’s nostrils widen with each breath).
Bloating
Let your baby get plenty of rest.
Bluish skin, lips or nails (cyanosis, which can be a sign of low oxygen levels in your blood or tissues).
Previous stomach surgery
Cancers that do not express ER or PR are “hormone receptor negative” and need to be treated with chemotherapy unless the cancer is very small. The chemotherapy regimens available today are very effective in reducing the chances of cancer spread or recurrence and are generally given as outpatient therapy, not requiring hospital admission in the absence of complications.
The mosquitoes that spread dengue are active during the day.
Too much physical activity (overexertion).
antiplatelet therapy or anticoagulants can be given, as appropriate, to prevent recurrent strokes;
Relaxation techniques like yoga.
Excess gas and bloating.
Have a chronic condition that weakens your immune system.
As Parkinson’s disease progresses, the symptoms expand and intensify. Later stages of the disease often affect how your brain functions, causing dementia-like symptoms and depression.
Continuous infusion of inotropic drugs.
Medications. Several medications can cause a parkinsonism-like effect. The Parkinson's-like effects are often temporary if you stop taking the medication that caused them before the effects become permanent. However, the effects can linger for weeks or even months after you stop taking the medication.
The most common types of gastroenteritis only last a day or two. Your body can overcome most bacterial and viral infections on its own. Some types may last longer or need treatment to go away.
Mesial temporal sclerosis. This is a scar that forms in the inner part of your temporal lobe (part of your brain near your ear) that can give rise to focal seizures.
Hypotension.
How many people die from the flu each year?
Viruses that cause rhinorrhea (common cold)
Certain inherited high penetrance gene mutations greatly increase breast cancer risk, the most dominant being mutations in the genes BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB-2. Women found to have mutations in these major genes may consider risk reduction strategies such as surgical removal of both breasts and/or chemoprevention.
Lecanemab targets amyloid fibers before they stick together. Donanemab targets amyloid proteins that have already clumped together to form plaques.
A gastroenterologist will evaluate your esophagus to diagnose GERD. Tests may include:
Avoid being around other people when you or they are sick with the flu or other infectious diseases.
Dizziness or Lightheadedness:
Symptoms and Causes
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common lung disease causing restricted airflow and breathing problems. It is sometimes called emphysema or chronic bronchitis.
Your overall health
Severe low blood sugar (hypoglycemia): Hypoglycemia happens when your blood sugar level drops below the range that’s healthy for you. Severe hypoglycemia is very low blood sugar. It mainly affects people with diabetes who use insulin. Signs include blurred or double vision, clumsiness, disorientation and seizures. It requires treatment with emergency glucagon and/or medical intervention.
Cough.
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
As the day goes on, you may or may not begin to experience what are called “systemic symptoms” — symptoms that affect the rest of your body. These may include fever, chills and body aches.
Pulmonary rehabilitation teaches exercises to improve your breathing and ability to exercise.
For patients with early-stage, slow-growing prostate cancer, especially in older adults, immediate treatment may not be necessary. Instead, doctors may recommend careful monitoring through:
How can I figure out my seizure triggers?
Understanding the Prostate Gland
Stage 1 & 2 (Early-stage)	Confined to the prostate	Active surveillance, surgery, or radiation
Sedentary lifestyle and poor physical activity levels may also contribute.
Your symptoms don’t start to improve after seven to 10 days or if you have a fever lasting longer than three days.
Galantamine
More about levodopa
The common cold isn’t fatal. In some people — especially those with weakened immune systems — a cold could lead to other conditions that could cause severe health problems. Those complications include:
Alginates. Alginates are naturally occurring sugars derived from seaweed. They help block acid reflux by floating on top of the acid, creating a physical barrier between the acid and your esophagus. You can get alginates by themselves, and you can also get antacids with alginates.
when a diagnosis of obesity is established, advise on management of the disorder, including through healthy diet and regular physical activity, and explain and offer, as appropriate, available therapeutic and surgical measures; and
Severe chest pain or discomfort that lasts for more than a few minutes, or comes and goes.
Loss of appetite: A significant reduction in appetite, often accompanied by early satiety (feeling full quickly).
Good cleaning. Diligent cleaning is especially important in community places like schools, daycares, nursing homes and hospitals, where many people use the same facilities every day. Cleaning with disinfectants can help remove germs that may linger on common surfaces.
In 2022, new WHO guidelines prioritized a short 6-month all-oral regimen known as BPaLM/BPaL as a treatment of choice for eligible patients. Globally in 2024, approximately 34 000 people with MDR/RR-TB were reported to have started treatment on the 6-month shorter regimens (known as BPaLM and BDLLfxC), a substantial increase from 5653 in 2023 and 1744 in 2022. The shorter duration, lower pill burden and high efficacy of this novel regimen can help ease the burden on health systems and save precious resources to further expand the diagnostic and treatment coverage for all individuals in need. WHO recommends expanded access to all-oral regimens.
(Minimally invasive, faster recovery, less blood loss)
feeling constantly tired and lacking energy, even with enough rest
Avoiding close contact with those who have cold and cough respiratory infections
Alzheimer’s disease affects approximately 24 million people worldwide. One in 10 people older than 65 have it. Nearly 1 in 3 people older than 85 have AD.
health sector responses designed and equipped to identify risk, prevent, treat and manage the disease. These actions need to build upon and be integrated into broader efforts to address NCDs and strengthen health systems through a primary health care approach.
Typically, a physical exam is enough to determine if you have a cold. You may need tests if the provider suspects you have COVID-19, the flu or another condition. The provider may give you a nasal swab test (cotton swab rubbed inside your nose) to check for these viruses. Chest X-rays can rule out other conditions, such as bronchitis or pneumonia.
Diabetes is common. Approximately 37.3 million people in the United States have diabetes, which is about 11% of the population. Type 2 diabetes is the most common form, representing 90% to 95% of all diabetes cases.
support behaviours of children around healthy eating, physical activity, sedentary behaviours and sleep, regardless of current weight status;
Medications to ease constipation (including fiber supplements and laxatives).
Icteric. You may notice your pee is darker than usual. Your skin and the whites of your eyes turn yellow. These are jaundice symptoms. This stage lasts one to two weeks.
Other infections
Fatigue.
A TRUS-guided biopsy is typically done where small tissue samples are taken from multiple regions of the prostate.
Calcium channel blockers (verapamil).
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a group of symptoms that affect your digestive system. It’s a common but uncomfortable gastrointestinal disease, or condition that affects your intestines.
If any of these symptoms are present, it is crucial to seek medical help immediately. Early intervention can prevent further damage to the heart and increase the chances of survival.
Overweight and obesity, as well as their related noncommunicable diseases, are largely preventable and manageable.
What are the symptoms of the common cold in babies?
Antibiotics for H. pylori
Alzheimer’s disease can make it hard for you to speak, read or understand language (aphasia). You may:
Sit less.
Stage 2: Localized but Larger Tumor
How serious is gastroenteritis?
What are the signs and symptoms of epileptic seizures?
Deficiencies in nutrients like vitamin E, selenium, and omega-3 fatty acids may also contribute.
Donepezil
Gastrointestinal perforation: An ulcer that makes a hole in your GI tract (this is an emergency)
At the core of most prostate cancers are mutations in the DNA of prostate cells. These mutations may:
What are the signs and symptoms of gastroenteritis?
Digoxin overuse.
Prostate cancer can lead to several physical and functional complications, both from the disease itself and its treatment. These complications vary depending on the stage of cancer, its rate of progression, and the type of treatment received.
The BMI categories for defining obesity vary by age and gender for adults, adolescents, children and infants.
speech and language therapy to address difficulties with communication, speech, and swallowing;
What are the symptoms of the common cold?
However, a heart attack can lead to long-term complications, such as heart failure or arrhythmias, requiring ongoing medical care and lifestyle changes.
The best way to reduce your risk is to get the flu vaccine yearly. You can get it as a shot or a mist sprayed into your nose. The influenza virus can change (mutate) over time, so you need to get vaccinated every year.
hypertension: the leading contributor to stroke. Individuals with hypertension have a nearly three times higher risk of stroke compared to those without hypertension;
There are certain things you can do to help you feel better when a migraine attack happens, including:
Long-term exposure to environmental toxins like cadmium, asbestos, and pesticides may increase risk, particularly in occupational settings.
Skin or white of your eyes looks yellow (jaundice)
Strengthening your immune system: Get enough sleep, eat a healthy diet and exercise so your body is ready to fight off germs.
Have a history of kidney, liver, neurological, heart or blood vessels disease, including stroke.
enjoy a healthy life (healthy diet, physical activity, sleep duration and quality, avoid tobacco and alcohol, emotional self-regulation);
What is the best way to get rid of gastroenteritis?
Obesity
Manage stress: Long-term stress may negatively affect overall health; incorporating relaxation techniques such as meditation, yoga, or hobbies can be beneficial.
Smoking. Tobacco smoke relaxes your LES, whether you’re the one smoking or you’re exposed to second-hand smoke. Smoking also triggers coughing, which opens your LES. Smoking and chronic coughing can weaken your diaphragm muscles and contribute to developing a hiatal hernia. Smoking also slows down your digestion and causes your stomach to produce more acid.
What is the difference between the flu and the common cold?
Surgery may remove just the cancerous tissue (called a lumpectomy) or the whole breast (mastectomy). Lymph nodes are removed at the time of cancer surgery for invasive cancers. Complete removal of the lymph node bed under the arm (complete axillary dissection) was thought to be necessary in the past to prevent the spread of cancer. A smaller lymph node procedure called “sentinel node biopsy” is now preferred as it has fewer complications.
Experimental treatments
Increase intake of fruits and vegetables: A diet rich in fruits and vegetables provides antioxidants and vitamins, which may help reduce the risk of stomach cancer. Cruciferous vegetables (like broccoli, cauliflower, and cabbage) are particularly beneficial.
Practice good hygiene
H. pylori infection: This common bacteria lives in your stomach and/or duodenum. Most people have no symptoms, but if it grows too much, it can damage the lining.
Latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA): Like Type 1 diabetes, LADA also results from an autoimmune reaction, but it develops much more slowly than Type 1. People diagnosed with LADA are usually over the age of 30.
Type of test	In-range (mg/dL)	Prediabetes (mg/dL)	Diabetes (mg/L)
Don’t share food or eating utensils (forks, spoons, cups) with others.
The rise has occurred similarly among both boys and girls: in 2022 19% of girls and 21% of boys were overweight.
You may have trouble remembering:
other risk factors: high blood cholesterol, diabetes mellitus, high levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, overweight and obesity, physical inactivity, unhealthy diet (particularly diets high in sodium and low in fruits and vegetables), harmful use of alcohol, use of illicit drugs (e.g. cocaine), air pollution, high fasting blood glucose and kidney dysfunction.
Like all other treatments, these medications aren’t cures for Alzheimer’s disease. And they can’t reverse any damage that amyloid has already done.
How doctors diagnose peptic ulcer disease
The most common way to get a gastrointestinal infection is from contaminated food or water. You can also catch it by touching an infected person, or by touching a surface that an infected person touched.
Migraine – severe recurring headaches
Medications to prevent migraines: A healthcare provider usually prescribes preventive medications if you experience severe symptoms that interfere with your routine or have frequent migraines. These medications reduce how often and how severe migraines affect you. You can take these medications as directed, usually on a daily basis.
Such policies and actions include:
How common is IBS?
What is the main cause of gastroenteritis?
Blood glucose levels that remain high for too long can damage your body’s tissues and organs. This is mainly due to damage to your blood vessels and nerves, which support your body’s tissues.
Gastroenteritis often happens when you get an infection in your gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Bacteria and viruses can cause food poisoning and stomach flu infections. Chemicals can also cause gastroenteritis.
PET scan – used when detailed information about spread is required
IV nutrition
New lab tests are possible
Colorectal cancer is a type of cancer that affects the colon (large intestine) or rectum. It is one of the most common types of cancer worldwide. It can cause severe harm and death.
Early-stage prostate cancer
Common symptoms of pneumonia include:
Management and Treatment
Your age at diagnosis/how long you’ve had diabetes.
In 2022, there were an estimated 2.3 million women diagnosed with breast cancer and 670 000 deaths globally. Breast cancer occurs in every country of the world in women at any age after puberty but with increasing rates in later life.
Angiotensin-2 receptor blockers (ARBs) including losartan and telmisartan relax blood vessels and prevent kidney damage.
Cough, with or without phlegm
Outlook / Prognosis
Common symptoms of asthma include:
Colchicine overuse.
Intolerance to certain foods.
Outlook / Prognosis
Asking about your symptoms.
A migraine can affect anyone at any age, from children to adults. Women are more likely than men to experience a migraine.
Outlook / Prognosis
How is IBS diagnosed?
Treatments to control epilepsy include anti-seizure medications, special diets (usually in addition to anti-seizure medications) and surgery.
pain behind the eyes
Although there are several recognized risk factors for Parkinson’s disease, such as exposure to pesticides, for now, the only confirmed causes of Parkinson’s disease are genetic. When Parkinson’s disease isn’t genetic, experts classify it as “idiopathic” (this term comes from Greek and means “a disease of its own”). That means they don’t know exactly why it happens.
Contact a healthcare provider if you notice any unusual or red flag symptoms, such as:
Cough suppressants: Medications such as dextromethorphan (Robitussin® and Vicks DayQuil Cough®) and codeine can help reduce coughing. Providers don’t routinely recommend these for children under 5 years of age.
Can a cold kill you?
How do I take care of myself?
Prostate cancer is a type of cancer that forms in the tissues of the prostate gland—a small, walnut-shaped organ located just below the bladder in men. The prostate is part of the male reproductive system and is responsible for producing seminal fluid, which nourishes and helps transport sperm.
Slowing disease progression
Radiation therapy
Both types of myocardial infarction require prompt medical treatment to restore blood flow and prevent further damage to the heart.
Blood tests
Diabetes
Special measures, like respirators and well-ventilated spaces are important to reduce infection in healthcare facilities and other institutions.
Just about everyone gets gastroenteritis. But you’re more likely to get it more frequently if you:
How soon will I feel better?
There’s no cure for epilepsy. But there are many options to treat epilepsy.
Stomach Cancer (Gastric Cancer) – linked to diet & infection
Pain radiating to the arm, neck, jaw, or stomach.
Abnormal heartbeat or abnormal breathing.
transient ischaemic attack (TIA): a short period of symptoms similar to those of a stroke, caused by a brief blockage of blood flow to the brain. A TIA usually lasts only a few minutes and doesn't cause long-term damage.
What is viral hepatitis?
Adenovirus.
controlling high blood pressure through a healthy lifestyle and appropriate antihypertensive treatment;
Inability to keep fluids down, signs of dehydration.
Urine leakage while coughing, sneezing, or laughing
How doctors diagnose viral hepatitis
The common cold in children and babies occurs more often because they haven’t been exposed to as many viruses as adults. Their immune systems have to learn how to recognize and fight new germs.
Simulating dopamine. Dopamine agonists are medications that have a dopamine-like effect. Dopamine is a neurotransmitter, causing cells to act in a certain way when a dopamine molecule latches onto them. Dopamine agonists can latch on and cause cells to behave the same way. These are more common in younger patients to delay starting levodopa.
Cries more than usual.
Lifestyle changes and regular screening can help prevent colorectal cancer.
Many things can contribute to weakening your LES, either temporarily or permanently. Sometimes occasional acid reflux turns into chronic GERD when these factors overlap or persist for a long time.
Non-motor symptoms (with the potential early warning symptoms in bold) include:
Inhalers must be taken using the correct technique, and in some cases with a spacer device to help deliver the medication into the airways more effectively. Access to inhalers is limited in many low- and middle-income countries; in 2021 salbutamol inhalers were generally available in public primary health care facilities in half of low- and low-middle income countries.
Computed tomography (CT) scan. A CT scan is another imaging test. It’s a type of X-ray that takes cross-section images of your body — like slices — that create 3D images of the inside of your body. A CT scan is more precise than a standard X-ray.
Tobacco and recreational drug use.
Living with COPD
Liver failure, which can be fatal
What are the symptoms?
Impact
High-Quality of Life – Especially for patients with localized or recurrent cancer
A New Treatment Option for MASH
Symptoms and Causes
Vision changes.
LINX device. A newer procedure implants a device called LINX during surgery. The LINX device is a ring of tiny magnets that help keep the junction between the stomach and esophagus closed.
Bumping into furniture
limit screen time;
Cardiogenic shock is a severe condition in which the heart is unable to pump enough blood to meet the body’s needs, leading to organ failure and death if not treated promptly.
Parasitic gastroenteritis
Viral gastroenteritis sometimes goes by the nickname, “stomach flu,” although this isn’t a medical term. Influenza (flu) viruses don’t cause viral gastroenteritis. Viruses that can cause “stomach flu” include:
All types of hepatitis can be acute (short-term) illnesses that go away. Acute viral hepatitis goes through four general stages:
Common medications that stop migraines include:
How can I take care of myself or manage the symptoms?
Hearing loss.
Nausea and Sweating:
Blood tests
Some individual risk factors for skin cancer
Oxygen is used for people who have had COPD for a long time or have severe COPD.
Head injuries. Head injuries can result from vehicular accidents, falls or any blow to the head.
Studies suggest that long-term exposure to air pollution can increase the risk of heart attacks. Pollutants like fine particulate matter can cause inflammation in the blood vessels, contributing to the buildup of plaque and narrowing of the coronary arteries, ultimately leading to MI.
Frequent urination, especially at night
Antiemetic medications (metoclopramide).
In the case of haemorrhagic stroke, management includes action to control blood pressure; intensive care in a specialized stroke unit; and possibly surgical intervention.
The incubation period is the time between when you’re infected and when your symptoms first appear. The common cold incubation period is between 12 hours and three days after exposure to the virus.
What tests will be done to diagnose this condition?
Normally, a strong mucous lining protects your digestive tract from these substances. But in peptic ulcer disease, this protection breaks down. Pepsin and acids eat into the lining, forming ulcers. Most ulcers form in your stomach or duodenum, where these substances are most active. But they can also occur elsewhere.
How do you get rid of acid reflux? Is there a cure?
Reasoning
In addition, hypertension can cause kidney damage, leading to kidney failure.
Metabolic disorders. People with a metabolic condition (how your body obtains energy for normal functions) can have epilepsy. Your healthcare provider can detect many of these disorders through genetic tests.
TB disease occurs when bacteria multiply in the body and affect different organs. TB symptoms may be mild for many months, so it is easy to spread TB to others without knowing it. Symptoms depend on which part of the body is affected. While TB usually affects the lungs, it can also affect the kidneys, brain, and spine.
Rapid diagnostic tests recommended by WHO include biomarker-based point-of-care tests and molecular assays. All these tests are accurate and can provide initial results to guide treatment decisions within 48 hours of sample collection. Use of these tests will lead to major improvements in the early detection of TB and drug-resistant TB.
Fungal pneumonia
Prostate cancer typically starts in the gland cells of the prostate, but in some cases, it can spread beyond the prostate. This process is called metastasis and it significantly affects treatment options and outcomes.
not smoking tobacco
Shigella.
Alternative migraine remedies
Myocardial infarction (MI), commonly known as a heart attack, is a life-threatening medical condition that occurs when blood flow to a part of the heart muscle is blocked. This lack of blood flow leads to the damage or death of heart tissue, which can have severe consequences for the individual. A heart attack can lead to permanent damage to the heart and other complications, making it one of the leading causes of death worldwide.
What causes Alzheimer’s disease?
Bleeding in your body
compounded by stigma, discrimination and bullying. Children with obesity are very likely to become adults with obesity and are also at a higher risk of developing NCDs in adulthood.
Additional motor symptoms can include:
Bacteria – Bacteria from a pneumonia infection can enter your bloodstream and cause illness. This can result in dangerously low blood pressure, septic shock, and organ failure in some situations.
Fever lasts more than three days or is higher than 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius).
Underlying medical condition (depression, anxiety, sleep disorders and epilepsy).
Avoid touching your face, eyes, nose and mouth.
Neural tube defects (NTDs) in the developing fetus of a pregnant woman.
Dopamine metabolism blockers. Your body has natural processes to break down neurotransmitters like dopamine. Medications that block your body from breaking down dopamine allow more dopamine to remain available to your brain. They're especially useful early on and can also help when combined with levodopa in later stages of Parkinson's disease.
Prostate cancer or its treatments—such as surgery, radiation therapy, or hormone therapy—can damage the nerves and blood vessels responsible for erections. While erectile dysfunction may be temporary in some cases, others may require long-term solutions like medications, vacuum devices, or penile implants.
Red Hepatization – The fluid has been contaminated with red blood cells and immune cells. The lungs appear red and solid as a result of this.
Unexplained weight loss and fatigue
How do I know if I have the flu or COVID-19?
Focal onset seizures
Checking your blood pressure is the best way to know if you have high blood pressure. If hypertension isn’t treated, it can cause other health conditions like kidney disease, heart disease and stroke.
Skin infections.
The first sign of the common cold is often a sore throat. Other early symptoms may include runny nose, sneezing and coughing.
Ultrasound KUB – evaluates kidney, bladder, and prostate status
How severe are your symptoms?
How often do migraines happen?
A dietitian can help you choose foods and modify eating/drinking habits to avoid symptom flare-ups. They may recommend that you:
Alcoholic hepatitis. This is swelling in the liver that can cause fever, nausea, vomiting, belly pain, and jaundice (yellowish skin and eyes).
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). PPIs are stronger acid blockers that also promote healing. Your provider may prescribe them as a first-line treatment if your GERD is relatively severe or you have signs of tissue damage in your esophagus. They’re 90% effective in reducing acid reflux.
Your body may have a sensitivity to specific chemicals and preservatives in foods. This sensitivity makes a migraine more likely to happen, especially if combined with other triggers.
Partial Gastrectomy: In this procedure, the portion of the stomach containing the tumor is removed. The remaining part of the stomach is reattached to the small intestine.
Have symptoms that you think may mean you have viral hepatitis
Although uncommon, prostate cancer can also develop from non-glandular cells within or near the prostate. These include:
What causes epilepsy?
Have a blood disorder, like sickle cell disease.
Aiding ejaculation by contracting and pushing semen into the urethra
Electrocardiogram (ECG):
history of severe sunburns
Your risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease is 10% to 30% higher if you have a biological parent or sibling with it. You’re three times more likely than average to develop AD if two or more of your biological siblings have it.
Parenteral nutrition to give your body energy without using your stressed digestive system.
For people with severe dengue, hospitalization is often necessary.
The cancer remains within the prostate but is larger and may involve both lobes.
Migraines are common. Studies show that an estimated 12% of people in the United States experience migraines.
Pain in Other Areas of the Body:
TB occurs in every part of the world. In 2024, the largest number of new TB cases occurred in the WHO South-East Asia Region (34%), followed by the Western Pacific Region (27%) and the African Region (25%). Around 87% of new TB cases occurred in the 30 high TB burden countries, with two-thirds of the global total in India (25%), Indonesia (10%), the Philippines (6.8%), China (6.5%), Pakistan (6.3%), Nigeria (4.8%), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (3.9%) and Bangladesh (3.6%). The top five countries accounted for 55% of the global total.
Signs and symptoms of IBS include:
It is also important to raise community awareness to reduce the myths and stigma associated with asthma in some settings.
Therapy
Infectious diseases or toxic chemicals can trigger acute gastroenteritis.
More than 6 million people in the United States have congestive heart failure. It’s the leading cause of hospitalization in people older than 65.
If you have mild acid reflux, you can often manage it at home. If you have moderate to severe acid reflux, you might need a prescription to manage it. Medicine works for most people, but not all.
If soap and water aren’t available, use pre-moistened hand wipes or hand sanitizers. (Be sure to keep hand sanitizers away from children. They may be harmful if swallowed.)
Fever (more common in children).
Mood changes.
Babies can continue their normal activities if they seem well enough to do so. If they have a fever or complications, it’s best to keep them at home.
What cold medicines relieve symptoms?
Prevalence of hypertension
Parkinson’s disease can have a familial cause, which means you can inherit it from one or both of your parents. However, this only makes up about 10% of all cases.
Everyone can reduce their risk of stroke by:
Live in a long-term care facility.
Sometimes, you may have mild symptoms of congestive heart failure or none at all. This doesn’t mean you don’t have heart failure anymore. Symptoms of heart failure can range from mild to severe and may come and go.
Prevention
What foods should I eat or avoid while living with gastroenteritis?
Fungal Tests
Some health conditions may increase your Alzheimer’s risk, including:
Autoimmune Diseases:
ACE inhibitors help lower blood pressure and reduce the strain on the heart. They are often prescribed after a heart attack to improve recovery and reduce the risk of future heart problems.
Having high blood pressure.
Motor-related symptoms
When healthcare providers suspect Parkinson’s disease or need to rule out other conditions, various imaging and diagnostic tests are possible. These include:
What is diabetes?
Amputations.
Unless prescribed by their provider, don’t give your baby any over-the-counter cough or cold medicines. To treat common cold in babies:
Persistent indigestion: Discomfort in the upper abdomen, bloating, and feeling full after eating even small amounts of food.
Contributing Factors
Keep your baby comfortable.
Who Can Benefit?
Blank stare or “staring into space” look.
Uric acid stones
After wiping your baby’s nose, wash your hands and your baby’s hands.
or difficulty urinating, they should consult a qualified healthcare professional.
Checking that you don’t have symptoms suggesting other disorders.
A different study found that people who had heart failure had expected life spans ranging from three to 20 years after their hospital stay, depending on various factors like age and sex. It’s important to look at your specific situation when considering your prognosis.
Nerve damage (neuropathy), which can cause numbness, tingling and/or pain.
Outlook / Prognosis
Avoiding touching your face: Cold viruses spread from your hands to your eyes, nose and mouth.
limb contracture
You have a family history of prostate or breast cancer
If you get dengue, it’s important to:
Norovirus.
Some specific causes of gastroenteritis can have their own side effects. These are separate from the effects of gastroenteritis itself. Certain infections or toxins can do more lasting damage to your body.
Most people with epilepsy tend to have the same type of seizure, so have similar symptoms with each seizure.
Your healthcare provider will consider surgery if anti-seizure medications don’t control your seizures, and if your seizures are severe and debilitating. Epilepsy surgery can be a safe and effective treatment option when more than two anti-seizure medication trials fail to control your seizures. It’s important to be evaluated at an epilepsy center to see if you’re a candidate for epilepsy surgery if anti-seizure medications don’t control your seizures.
Baloxavir marboxil (Xofluza®). You take baloxavir marboxil by mouth as a pill or a liquid. You only take one dose. Baloxavir isn’t recommended if you’re pregnant, breastfeeding, hospitalized or have certain medical conditions.
Waking up short of breath at night.
Cough.
Linaclotide (Linzess®).
Staying at a weight that’s healthy for you.
What are peptic ulcer disease treatments?
A healthcare provider will do a physical examination. They’ll ask about your symptoms. They may do blood tests to check for signs of specific viruses. They may also do liver function tests.
Family history
isoniazid;
People who suspect they may have colorectal cancer should speak to their healthcare provider right away.
Stage 1: Very Early-Stage Prostate Cancer
Monitoring After Treatment
How long did your symptoms last?
Some of the complications from congestive heart failure include:
Genetic/Autoimmune Causes:
Dehydration or malnutrition
Prostate Biopsy
Occasional acid reflux is uncomfortable, but it’s not a disease. But some people have reflux all the time. Chronic acid reflux can really affect your quality of life, and it can also do real damage to your tissues.
Severe stomach pain that doesn’t go away
Struvite stones (often linked to infections)
You can get hepatitis D if you already have hepatitis B or have exposure to both viruses at the same time. Hepatitis D spreads through unprotected sex and sharing of needles.
What are the symptoms of acid reflux and GERD?
For children under 5 years of age:
Current medications
Discussing screening options with a urologist is essential to balance the benefits of early detection with the risks of overdiagnosis.
7. Cryotherapy (Cryoablation)
Hepatitis B. There are four stages of hepatitis B. Providers base stages on how your immune system reacts to the virus.
Esophageal pH test. This test measures the acid content inside your esophagus through a small wireless receiver. Your provider places the receiver in your esophagus during an endoscopy.
Activity changes
Are older than 65 or younger than 6.
Pneumocystis jirovecii
Managing symptoms
How well you respond to your treatment plan.
Stopping the rise in obesity demands multisectoral actions in areas such as food manufacturing, marketing and pricing and others that seek to address the wider determinants of health (such as poverty reduction and urban planning).
H1N1 (“swine flu”) and bird flu are both subtypes of influenza A.
Not drinking alcohol.
Viral hepatitis can cause acute (short-term) illness that goes away very quickly. But sometimes, it can take months for your liver to heal from the damage that hepatitis does. And some chronic forms of viral hepatitis never go away. Talk to your healthcare provider about recovery time in your situation.
Immune disorders. Conditions that cause your immune system to attack brain cells (also called autoimmune diseases) can lead to epilepsy.
Infections:
Parkinson’s disease isn’t contagious, and you can’t contract it from another person.
The time it takes to recover and see the effects of Parkinson’s disease treatments depends strongly on the type of treatments, the severity of the condition and other factors. Your healthcare provider is the best person to offer more information about what you can expect from treatment. The information they give you can consider any unique factors that might affect what you experience.
There are some smartphone apps available to help you keep a migraine journal.
Community risks to dengue also depend on population knowledge, attitudes and practices towards dengue, as exposure is closely related to behaviours such as water storage, plant-keeping and self-protection against mosquito bites. Routine vector surveillance and control activities and targeted community engagement greatly enhance resilience.
eat too much salty food (try to stay under 2 grams per day)
It’s important to finish all of the antibiotics that your healthcare provider prescribes. If you have frequent UTIs or your symptoms aren’t improving, your provider may test to see if your infection is resistant to antibiotics. Antibiotic-resistant infections may require IV antibiotics or other treatments.
RSV Testing
What Is Epilepsy?
Men who are unfit for surgery or wish to avoid it
Seizure signs and symptoms include:
What to eat (and drink):
Medications that slow your heart rate if your heart rate is faster than 70 beats per minute and you still have symptoms.
Fasting blood glucose test: For this test, you don’t eat or drink anything except water (fast) for at least eight hours before the test. As food can greatly affect blood sugar, this test allows your provider to see your baseline blood sugar.
blue, green or hazel eyes
Severe abdominal pain (especially that doesn’t improve when you poop or pass gas).
Seeing flashing lights, feeling dizzy, having a tingling sensation.
Anyone can get a urinary tract infection, but you’re more likely to get a UTI if you don't have a penis. This is because your urethra is shorter and closer to your anus, where E. coli bacteria are common.
Have asthma, COPD or another chronic lung disease.
Infection with the human metapneumovirus (HMPV)
Confusion and changes in behavior
Aspirin:
Your healthcare provider can help you identify your triggers. They might recommend keeping a migraine journal to track similarities between migraine attacks.
Deep brain stimulation
Technically, if you experience two or more seizures that weren’t caused by a known medical condition — for example, from alcohol withdrawal or low blood sugar — you’re considered to have epilepsy. Before making a diagnosis, your healthcare provider (or epilepsy specialist) will perform a physical exam, take your medical history and may order blood work (to rule out other causes). They may ask about your symptoms during the seizure and conduct other tests, as well.
Symptoms
IV fluids
Encephalitis. Inflammation of your brain, known as encephalitis, can sometimes cause parkinsonism.
COPD is not curable but symptoms can improve if one avoids smoking and exposure to air pollution and gets vaccines to prevent infections. It can also be treated with medicines, oxygen and pulmonary rehabilitation.
Lifestyle changes (healthy diet, exercise, quitting smoking)
Behavior and personality
Confusion
Avoiding touching face, eyes, nose and mouth without washing hands
Many people with IBS benefit from seeing a therapist. Therapy can help you get a handle on stress and conditions such as anxiety and depression that contribute to IBS. Some people find relief through:
How well you manage the condition over time and your access to diabetes care.
Stops eating.
Who diagnoses a migraine?
restricting marketing of foods high in sugars, salt and fats, especially those foods aimed at children and teenagers; and
Viral hepatitis is a viral infection that affects millions of people worldwide. It causes inflammation in your liver. Viral hepatitis can be acute (short-term) and cause symptoms that last from a few weeks to a few months. But you can have a form of chronic (long-term) viral hepatitis that doesn’t go away.
History of taking drugs that can damage your heart muscle, such as some cancer drugs.
Talk to a provider about your best treatment option if you have a history of frequent UTIs.
Stage 3: Locally Advanced Cancer
Recurrent prostate cancer refers to cancer that returns after initial treatment. It can reappear in the prostate region (local recurrence) or spread to other parts of the body (distant recurrence), such as the bones, liver, lungs, or lymph nodes.
TB disease is usually treated with antibiotics and can be fatal without treatment.
Unexplained weight loss: Losing weight without changes in diet or physical activity.
immunotherapy.
Most people who get dengue do not have symptoms. For those who do, the most common symptoms are high fever, headache, body aches, nausea and rash. Most get better in 1–2 weeks. Some develop severe dengue and need care in a hospital.
Supportive care is important for people with colorectal cancer. It aims to manage symptoms, provide pain relief, and give emotional support. It can help to increase quality of life for people with colorectal cancer and their families.
Hepatitis A. The hepatitis A virus (HAV) causes this infection. You can get hepatitis A from eating contaminated food or water that contains the virus.
There are conditions or circumstances experts have linked to parkinsonism. While these aren’t true Parkinson’s disease, they have similar features, and healthcare providers may consider these causes while diagnosing Parkinson’s disease.
Facing a double burden of malnutrition
Toxins and poisons. Exposure to several substances, such as manganese dust, carbon monoxide, fumes from welding or certain pesticides, can lead to parkinsonism.
Having coronary artery disease.
Chronic pelvic pain.
See your provider as recommended. Your healthcare provider will set up a schedule for you to see them. These visits are especially important to help with managing your conditions and finding the right medications and dosages.
Medications
Experts are still studying Alzheimer’s disease to learn more about what exactly causes these proteins to build up. Researchers think the protein build-up happens a long time before it causes symptoms. It might happen up to 10 years before you notice any changes.
Events in early life affect the developing lungs and can increase the risk of asthma. These include low birth weight, prematurity, exposure to tobacco smoke and other sources of air pollution, as well as viral respiratory infections.
The symptoms of a migraine come in four phases. The most notable is a headache attack.
Dizziness.
Nausea and vomiting: Ongoing nausea, sometimes with vomiting, especially if the cancer causes obstruction.
difficulty breathing
Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (venlafaxine, duloxetine).
Heart valve problems.
Nausea and vomiting
The mucous lining in your digestive tract protects it from acids and enzymes and helps repair damage, especially in your stomach and duodenum. PUD happens when something weakens these defenses.
Vaccination: The most common types of pneumonia can be prevented by vaccination. The vaccine available include
Surgery
Cleaning frequently used surfaces: Viruses can live on doorknobs and other places people often touch.
Prevention
How common is diabetes?
How do you know if you have a UTI?
COPD symptoms can get worse quickly. These are called flare-ups. These usually last for a few days and often require additional medicine.
Antibiotics should not be stopped too soon if you have a bacterial infection; otherwise, the infection may not resolve completely. This indicates that your pneumonia may recur. Antibiotic resistance can be exacerbated by abruptly stopping antibiotics. Infections that are resistant to antibiotics are more difficult to treat. With at-home treatment, viral pneumonia usually clears up in 1 to 3 weeks. Antivirals may be required in some circumstances. Fungal pneumonia is treated with antifungal medicines. It may require a longer treatment time.
If you get UTIs often, methenamine hippurate is another nonantibiotic alternative that helps prevent infections.
Erectile and sexual dysfunction.
Diets high in saturated fats, trans fats, and cholesterol contribute to the buildup of plaque in the arteries, leading to atherosclerosis and an increased risk of MI. High intake of processed foods, sugar, and red meat can also negatively affect heart health.
How long does gastroenteritis last?
Limit alcohol intake.
X-rays: A special type of X-ray called a barium swallow can be used to visualize the upper gastrointestinal tract. The patient swallows a barium solution, which highlights the stomach on X-ray images.
Men over 45, especially those with risk factors like family history or certain genetic traits, should speak to their doctor about regular screening options such as PSA tests and digital rectal exams. Early intervention not only improves survival but also reduces complications and preserves quality of life.
A family history of heart disease increases the risk of myocardial infarction. Inherited conditions such as familial hypercholesterolemia, which causes high cholesterol levels from birth, can also significantly increase the likelihood of developing atherosclerosis and subsequent heart attacks.
Not using recreational drugs.
Long-term complications (months to years) are:
Autoimmune conditions, such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, can increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. These conditions cause chronic inflammation that can contribute to the buildup of plaque in the arteries and increase the likelihood of a heart attack.
screening: the application of mammography in an apparently healthy population, usually women 50-69 years of age, to identify pre-clinical lesions before recognizable signs or symptoms appear.
Act more suspicious (even around people they’ve known for years)
In people with COPD, the lungs can get damaged or clogged with phlegm. Symptoms include cough, sometimes with phlegm, difficulty breathing, wheezing and tiredness.
Outlook / Prognosis
Severe abdominal pain or a rigid, distended abdomen.
Do peptic ulcers go away on their own?
Visceral hypersensitivity: You may have extra-sensitive nerves in your GI tract. People with IBS tend to have a lower pain tolerance than people without it. Your digestive tract may be super sensitive to abdominal pain or discomfort.
Covering of the nose while sneezing
The prevalence of hypertension varies across regions and country income groups. The WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region has the highest prevalence of hypertension (38%) while the WHO Western Pacific Region has the lowest prevalence of hypertension (29%).
limiting alcohol consumption
A nasal spray.
4. Urinary Tract Involvement
ethambutol.
Risk factors
Smoking: Smoking usually results in the damage of the body’s natural defense systems against bacteria and viruses, making individuals more prone to infections like pneumonia.
The following are some of the symptoms of walking pneumonia:
Digital Rectal Examinations (DRE)
Diabetes is a complex condition, so its management involves several strategies. In addition, diabetes affects everyone differently, so management plans are highly individualized.
Most prostate cancers are adenocarcinomas, which develop slowly. In many cases, prostate cancer may remain confined to the gland for years without causing noticeable symptoms. However, in some men, the disease may grow aggressively and spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body if left undiagnosed.
Pericarditis:
Occasional, uncomplicated gastroesophageal reflux (GER) and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) are both common. GERD is estimated to affect about 20% of adults and 10% of children in the U.S.
Eat well by choosing food that gives your liver the nutrients it needs.
Fungal infections can cause fungal gastroenteritis. The most common fungal infections are:
Cancer / Tumor-Related
No specific therapy works for everyone, but most people with IBS can find a treatment plan that works for them. Typical treatment options include changing the foods you eat and your routine. Medications can help, too. Behavioral health therapy may help.
Watermelon.
Use a water-based lubricant during sex
Pain management medications
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitors:
Urinary leakage during coughing or exertion (stress incontinence)
Use of certain medications. Diphenhydramine, an ingredient in cold, allergy and sleep over-the-counter products, is a reported trigger.
Popsicles.
Medications to help with intestinal spasms.
Ability to do your usual activities
3. Local Invasion
When acid creeps into places it doesn’t belong, you’re bound to feel it. Acid irritates and inflames the tissues inside your esophagus, which runs from your stomach up through your chest to your throat.
Rotavirus.
It’s important to note that there are some diabetes risk factors you can’t change, such as your genetics/family history, age and race. Know that Type 2 diabetes is a complex condition that involves many contributing factors.
Genetics. Some types of epilepsy (like juvenile myoclonic epilepsy and childhood absence epilepsy) are more likely to run in families (inherited). Researchers believe that although there’s some evidence that specific genes are involved, the genes only increase the risk of epilepsy, and other factors may be involved. There are certain epilepsies that result from abnormalities that affect how brain cells can communicate with each other and can lead to abnormal brain signals and seizures.
Possible surgery or intervention as a treatment for coronary artery blockage, heart attack, valve disease (valve repair or replacement) or congenital heart disease.
Strong odors.
Cover your nose and mouth when you sneeze or cough. Cough or sneeze into your elbow or a tissue rather than your bare hand.
Proton therapy uses proton particles instead of traditional X-rays to deliver radiation directly to the tumor. This method deposits most of its energy at the tumor site, sparing healthy tissues around the prostate.
high-salt diet
Crohn’s disease
Key Risk Factors:
You should seek care if you:
Diabetes is a condition that happens when your blood sugar (glucose) is too high. It develops when your pancreas doesn’t make enough insulin or any at all, or when your body isn’t responding to the effects of insulin properly. Diabetes affects people of all ages. Most forms of diabetes are chronic (lifelong), and all forms are manageable with medications and/or lifestyle changes.
Peptic ulcers usually develop in your stomach or duodenum.
Congestive heart failure, or heart failure, is a long-term condition in which your heart can’t pump blood well enough to meet your body’s needs. Your heart is still working. But because it can’t handle the amount of blood it should, blood builds up in other parts of your body. Most of the time, it collects in your lungs, legs and feet.
Refusing to feed.
Medications such as cancer drugs (chemotherapy).
Fatigue when you’re active.
unexplained weight loss that is sudden and losing weight without trying
Pain that spreads to the abdomen or groin
Swollen lymph nodes in your neck.
There are many medications that can manage Alzheimer’s symptoms. Your provider will suggest a combination that fits your unique needs. You might need:
Severe pain in the lower back or side
What can I expect if I have this condition?
What are the congestive heart failure symptoms?
You can lower your risk of dengue by avoiding mosquito bites, especially during the day.
Physical overexertion.
Don’t ignore or avoid symptoms. Parkinson’s disease can cause a wide range of symptoms, many of which are treatable by treating the condition or the symptoms themselves. Treatment can make a major difference in keeping symptoms from having worse effects.
vomiting
What is the best thing to do for a urinary tract infection?
Difficulty concentrating.
Psychic symptoms, including fear, dread, anxiety or déjà vu.
engaging in regular physical activity, aiming for at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise per week;
Surgery for GERD includes:
The following lifestyle changes can help prevent urinary tract infections:
Low-dose radiation for bone pain
Causes of overweight and obesity
Nausea and vomiting
Tricyclic antidepressants, which treat depression and pain.
Legionella
Mix-and-match languages (if you speak more than one)
Surgery is typically followed by other treatments to address any remaining cancer cells.
Symptoms of lung cancer include a cough that does not go away, chest pain and shortness of breath.
Treatment for high cholesterol.
Short-acting bronchodilators start to work in seconds and can last for 4–6 hours. These are often used during flare-ups.
In the U.S., about 3.4 million people have epilepsy. Of this number, 3 million are adults and 470,000 are children. There are 150,000 new cases of epilepsy in the U.S. each year. Worldwide, about 65 million people have epilepsy.
People with weakened immune systems and people with less access to clean water, nutrition, sanitation and healthcare are more vulnerable to gastroenteritis. They might get it more often, and for longer.
Over-the-counter migraine medications
Pneumonia, both viral and bacterial, is contagious. This means that they can be passed from person to person by inhaling airborne droplets from a sneeze or cough. These types of pneumonia can also be contracted by coming into touch with surfaces or items contaminated with pneumonia-causing bacteria or viruses. Fungal pneumonia can be contracted from the environment. It does not pass from one person to the next.
Some prostate cancers remain slow-growing and may never cause significant harm, while others are aggressive and fast-spreading.
What are Alzheimer’s risk factors?
chemotherapy
c. Proton Beam Therapy (See Section 3)
Chemotherapy drugs can be given orally, intravenously, or directly into the abdominal cavity in some cases.
People with IBS experience symptoms that include abdominal pain and cramps. With IBS, you may also have frequent diarrhea, constipation or both. IBS doesn’t cause tissue damage in your GI (gastrointestinal) tract or increase your risk of more serious conditions, like colon cancer. Instead, it’s a chronic (long-term) condition that most people can manage by changing their routines and what they eat, taking medications and receiving behavioral therapy.
Signs of severe blood loss, like pale skin or fainting
Chronic Stomach Conditions: Conditions like gastric ulcers, gastritis (inflammation of the stomach lining), and stomach polyps can increase the risk of gastric cancer. Chronic atrophic gastritis, which results in thinning and inflammation of the stomach lining, is particularly concerning for cancer development.
Don’t share needles to take drugs
50% to 60% for year five.
Reduce the risks of hypertension by:
a persistent cough, especially at night
Pregnancy loss (miscarriage).
Lifestyle Modifications:
About 16% of adults aged 18 years and older worldwide were obese in 2022. The worldwide prevalence of obesity more than doubled between 1990 and 2022.
Periodic biopsies and imaging
Parkinson’s Disease – movement disorder due to brain nerve damage
How common is this condition?
Diagnosis and Tests
The best-known symptoms of Parkinson’s disease involve loss of muscle control. However, experts now know that muscle control-related issues aren’t the only possible symptoms of Parkinson’s disease.
Skin color turned pale.
What can I expect if I have a urinary tract infection?
Imaging Tests: Imaging studies help assess the size of the tumor and whether cancer has spread to other areas. Common imaging tests include:
Pain that wakes you up at night
Develops a high fever.
What causes a migraine?
Everyone has a bad day or feels upset sometimes. But mood and personality changes caused by Alzheimer’s are more intense or sudden than everyday anger or grumpiness.
How is congestive heart failure treated?
Children and adults who are overweight or obese are at a greater risk of asthma.
Additional Common Questions
What is the prognosis for diabetes?
Treatments for lung cancer are based on the type of cancer, how much it has spread, and the person’s medical history. Early detection of lung cancer can lead to better treatments and outcomes.
Admission into the hospital may be required in severe infections, individual over 65 years of age, or if they have variations in blood pressure, damage to kidney function, rapid breathing, confusion, low/high heart rate and breathing difficulties.
Thrombolytic drugs, such as alteplase, are used to dissolve blood clots and restore blood flow to the heart. These medications are typically given in emergency settings if angioplasty is not immediately available.
Diagnosis of anxiety, depression or post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
People with memory loss or other Alzheimer’s symptoms may have difficulty recognizing changes in their own mind and body. These signs may be more obvious to loved ones.
Maintain a healthy weight through regular exercise	Avoid tobacco use, including smoking and chewing
Eating dinner earlier. Gravity plays a role in keeping acid down, so it’s a good idea to eat several hours before reclining in the living room or going to bed
Surgical Treatments:
Heart MRI (magnetic resonance imaging).
Have an underlying condition or are at risk for severe illness. Providers may prescribe antivirals even if you’ve had symptoms for longer than 48 hours.
While just 2% of children and adolescents aged 5–19 were living with obesity in 1990 (31 million young people), by 2022, 8% of children and adolescents were living with obesity (over 160 million young people).
Diet: Meal planning and choosing a healthy diet for you are key aspects of diabetes management, as food greatly impacts blood sugar. If you take insulin, counting carbs in the food and drinks you consume is a large part of management. The amount of carbs you eat determines how much insulin you need at meals. Healthy eating habits can also help you manage your weight and reduce your heart disease risk.
How does this condition affect my body?
Cramped or small handwriting. Known as micrographia, this happens because of muscle control problems.
When glucose is in your bloodstream, it needs help — a “key” — to reach its final destination. This key is insulin (a hormone). If your pancreas isn’t making enough insulin or your body isn’t using it properly, glucose builds up in your bloodstream, causing high blood sugar (hyperglycemia).
The flu virus itself can cause complications or it can weaken your immune system and allow bacteria to infect different parts of your body (secondary infection). Complications and secondary infections include:
Skin Cancer (Melanoma) – rising due to UV exposure
There’s no cure for heart failure. As congestive heart failure gets worse, your heart muscle pumps less blood to your organs, and you move toward the next stage of heart failure. Since you can’t move backward through the heart failure stages, the goal of treatment is to keep you from moving forward through the stages or to slow down the progression of your heart failure.
Retinopathy, which can lead to blindness.
Rifaximin (Xifaxan®).
Can foods cause acid reflux?
A urinary tract infection is a very common type of infection in your urinary system.
Stay physically active.
Prostate cancer can also spread by direct invasion into surrounding tissues, such as the seminal vesicles, bladder, or rectum. In some cases, this may lead to urinary obstruction or rectal discomfort.
Swelling in your nostrils.
A healthcare provider will ask you about your symptoms and perform a physical exam. During the exam, the provider will check for signs, such as:
What causes the condition?
Being Black or Latino
Since there’s no known cause for IBS, you can’t prevent or avoid it. If you have IBS, you can keep symptoms from flaring up by avoiding triggers.
Weak or interrupted urinary stream
Irritable bowel syndrome can change your bathroom habits and cause pain in your gut.
Cyclosporiasis.
Safe food handling. Food can become contaminated at any stage of production, from harvesting and storage to cooking and preparation. Remember to wash your hands before and after handling food. Wash, refrigerate, freeze, cook and serve food according to food safety guidelines.
Hypertension can also burst or block arteries that supply blood and oxygen to the brain, causing a stroke.
blood in the stool (rectal bleeding), either bright red or dark and tar-like
Had problems talking or understanding what was said to you.
severe headaches
Do babies get GERD?
The tumor is usually not palpable on a digital rectal exam.
Hemiplegic migraine.
Staphylococci (Staph).
Some medications and supplements
Chronic fatigue syndrome.
Peeing can play a big role in getting rid of bacteria from your body. Your pee is a waste product, and each time you empty your bladder, you help remove that waste from your body.
Medical History and Physical Exam: The doctor will first take a detailed medical history and perform a physical exam to check for symptoms such as abdominal pain, lumps, or signs of anemia or jaundice.
If you have Parkinson’s disease, the best thing you can do is follow the guidance of your healthcare provider on how to take care of yourself.
Multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB)
Symptoms
AFB Smear and Culture: Tuberculosis can also present like pneumonia. This test is required to identify tuberculosis bacteria in the lungs.
Consider wearing a mask if you’re sick and can’t avoid being around others.
Irregular heartbeat.
lung infections that keep coming back.
Special Test:  Special tests can identify specific causes of pneumonia. These include those which cannot be cultured Examples are
Medications
Light, sound and odor sensitivity.
Blood in your poop.
Promote abnormal protein production that fuels tumor growth
Loss of bladder or bowel control in extreme cases
Obesity or sedentary lifestyle
High cholesterol
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Scan: PET scans can help detect cancer spread by showing areas of high metabolic activity, which are typically associated with cancer cells.
If you have unusual symptoms, or if they want to investigate your symptoms further, they may order some tests. A poop test or blood test can help prove gastroenteritis and rule out other conditions.
When should I seek medical care for gastroenteritis?
What symptoms do you experience?
If you notice persistent symptoms such as frequent urination, difficulty urinating, blood in the urine or semen, pelvic discomfort, or erectile dysfunction, it is important to consult a doctor. These could be early warning signs of prostate cancer or other prostate-related conditions.
Slow-healing sores or cuts.
Your provider will work with you and your loved ones to develop a treatment plan that fits your unique needs. They’ll help you set realistic goals for your short-term health and long-term outlook.
Among other complications, hypertension can cause serious damage to the heart. Excessive pressure can harden arteries, decreasing the flow of blood and oxygen to the heart. This elevated pressure and reduced blood flow can cause:
A UTI causes inflammation in the lining of your urinary tract. The inflammation may cause the following problems:
Zanamivir (Relenza®). You breathe zanamivir in through your mouth with an inhaler. You usually have to take it for several days. Zanamivir isn’t recommended for people with breathing issues, like asthma or COPD.
Some other preventive measures include:
Brain MRI
2. Urinary Incontinence
Skin type classification	Do you burn in the sun?	Do you tan after having been in the sun?
Beta-Blockers:
fatigue;
Over time, the way your body uses levodopa changes, and levodopa can also lose its effectiveness. Increasing your dose can help with that, but that increases the chance and severity of side effects, and the dose can only go so high before it reaches toxic levels.
Induced parkinsonism
Asthma is often under-diagnosed and under-treated, particularly in low- and middle-income countries.
How can you prevent Alzheimer’s disease?
aspiration pneumonia, a lung infection
Recurrent Prostate Cancer
Incubation. You have a type of viral hepatitis, but you don’t have symptoms. Hepatitis A, B, C and D are contagious. That means you can pass the virus on to other people even though you don’t feel sick. The incubation period varies. On average, incubation lasts between two weeks and three months.
Genetic Factors:
Treatment for people with Stage A heart failure includes:
Aura: An aura is a group of sensory, motor and/or speech symptoms that act as a warning sign of a migraine headache. The aura phase can last as long as 60 minutes or as little as five. You might experience both the aura and the headache at the same time.
Many men may have heard of the prostate gland, PSA (Prostate-Specific Antigen) tests, or cancer screenings, but may not fully understand their importance until symptoms appear. By recognizing the early signs of prostate cancer and understanding the risk factors, men can take proactive steps to safeguard their health.
Nausea and vomiting.
Large amounts of fluid buildup in your belly (the doctor will call it ascites)
Pleural Fluid Analysis: Sometimes fluid collects around the lungs between its coverings. This fluid is tested for identifying the cause of pneumonia.
Biological family history of migraines.
Lung abscesses – These are pus-filled cavities in the lungs. They can be treated with antibiotics. To eliminate the pus, patients may require drainage or surgery.
There are two major seizure groups:
Tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline, nortriptyline, doxepin).
People who have Stage D HFrEF (heart failure with reduced ejection fraction) have advanced symptoms that don’t get better with treatment. This is the final stage of heart failure.
Experience mood swings (including being more aggressive than usual)
Rigidity or stiffness. Lead-pipe rigidity and cogwheel stiffness are common symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. Lead-pipe rigidity is a constant, unchanging stiffness when moving a body part. Cogwheel stiffness happens when you combine tremor and lead-pipe rigidity. It gets its name because of the jerky, stop-and-go appearance of the movements (think of it as the second hand on a mechanical clock).
Starts wheezing.
Cardiovascular (heart and blood vessel) issues are the most common type of long-term diabetes complication. They include:
Chronic conditions – If you have certain pre-existing medical disorders, pneumonia may exacerbate them. Congestive heart failure and emphysema are two of these disorders. Pneumonia raises the risk of having a heart attack in some people.
Why Proton Therapy?
Congestive heart failure is a chronic, or lifelong, condition. You’ll need to treat it for the rest of your life.
Investments to end TB
Peptic ulcer disease (PUD) is a condition that causes ulcers (open sores) to develop in the lining of your digestive tract. The word “peptic” comes from pepsin, a digestive enzyme that your stomach produces. Pepsin and stomach acid help break down food for digestion. These substances are highly corrosive.
What are the best common cold remedies?
Food additives like nitrates and MSG.
overweight is BMI-for-age greater than 1 standard deviation above the WHO Growth Reference median; and
What are the risk factors for getting gastroenteritis?
The flu is an illness you get from the influenza virus. It causes symptoms like head and body aches, sore throat, fever and respiratory symptoms, which can be severe. Flu is most common in winter months, when many people can get sick at once (an epidemic).
Baclofen. Baclofen is a muscle relaxant, often prescribed to reduce muscle spasms. It can also help reduce the frequency of LES relaxation events, which reduces the frequency of acid reflux. Baclofen isn’t a first-line treatment for acid reflux, but it may be a part of your treatment plan.
Diagnostic methods for colorectal cancer include physical examination, imaging (such as abdominal ultrasound, computed tomography scans, and magnetic resonance imaging), examination of the inside of the colon using colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy, taking a sample of tissue (biopsy) for histopathology examination, and molecular testing to identify specific genetic mutations or biomarkers to guide the best treatment option.
overweight is on the rise in low- and middle-income countries. In Africa, the number of overweight children under 5 years has increased by nearly 12.1% since 2000.
A healthcare provider may order the following tests to diagnose a UTI:
It can take about eight to 72 hours to go through the four stages.
Change your birth control
They’ll recommend treatment that’s right for your situation.
Have diabetes.
limiting use of alcohol; and
What’s the outlook for a migraine?
In newborn babies, the common symptoms are wheezing, grunting, breathing rapidly, irritability and lethargic behavior. Mild symptoms of pneumonia resemble that of a regular cold or flu but they tend to last longer.
Symptoms and Causes
Management and Treatment
You and your healthcare provider will discuss the specific medication, combination of medications and formulations to best manage your symptoms. All medications should be used under the direction of a headache specialist or provider. As with any medication, it’s important to carefully follow your provider’s instructions.
Chemotherapy
Seek therapy for substance abuse. Alcohol and other illegal drugs can damage your brain, which can then lead to epilepsy.
Within some countries there is a clear relationship between increasing incidence of non-melanoma skin cancers with decreasing latitude, i.e. higher UV radiation levels.
Studies have shown that screening can reduce both the incidence and mortality of colorectal cancer through early detection and removal of precancerous growths.
Frequent heartburn or acid reflux: Symptoms that don't respond well to antacids or over-the-counter treatments.
Some people find they can reduce acid reflux with lifestyle adjustments, like changing their eating habits, reducing alcohol and tobacco and losing weight. Healthcare providers encourage this approach.
Non-melanoma skin cancers
1. Lymphatic Spread
Researchers haven’t found that any of those remedies can prevent colds. But zinc may shorten the illness and reduce symptoms. However, it may cause permanent loss of smell, especially when you use it in nasal sprays.
A myocardial infarction is classified based on the severity of the damage caused to the heart and the type of blockage:
Food intolerance: Sensitivities or allergies to certain foods may contribute to IBS.
The prevalence of overweight (including obesity) among children and adolescents aged 5–19 has risen dramatically from just 8% in 1990 to 20% in 2022.
Aching joints
Medicine
If symptoms occur, they usually begin 4–10 days after infection and last for 2–7 days. Symptoms may include:
cover, empty and clean domestic water storage containers on a weekly basis; and
Alcohol-related fatty liver disease usually comes first. It can then get worse and become alcoholic hepatitis. Over time, it may turn into alcoholic cirrhosis.
May be detectable during physical exam or imaging but has not spread beyond the prostate.
Stages of care
It depends on the type of epilepsy you have and your response to medication. Some people who remain seizure-free for several years may be able to stop their medication. Your healthcare provider makes this decision. They’ll consider a variety of factors when making this decision, including an absence of brain lesions on your MRI, EEG findings and your medical history. Some people may require life-long medication.
Chemicals can injure and inflame the lining of your stomach and intestines. Some chemicals do this even in small amounts. Others, like alcohol and certain medications, can cause gastroenteritis in larger doses.
Diabetes Mellitus(Type 2 & Type 1)
In the United States, diabetes is the eighth leading cause of death. A large number of people with diabetes will die from a heart attack or stroke.
Antiviral drugs for influenza include:
Diagnostic methods for lung cancer include physical examination, imaging (such as chest X-rays, computed tomography scans, and magnetic resonance imaging), examination of the inside of the lung using a bronchoscopy, taking a sample of tissue (biopsy) for histopathology examination and definition of the specific subtype (NSCLC versus SCLC), and molecular testing to identify specific genetic mutations or biomarkers to guide the best treatment option.
3. Race and Ethnicity
What are seizure triggers?
Coronary artery disease and/or heart attack.
being overweight or obese
Limit smoking and alcohol consumption: Avoiding tobacco and reducing alcohol intake may help improve overall health and lower cancer risk.
Prognosis & Long-Term Outlook
Common causes of acid reflux and GERD include:
Maintain a healthy diet: Focus on a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and healthy fats. Reduce intake of red meat, processed foods, and high-fat dairy products.
UTIs are very common, especially in females. About half of females will have a UTI at some point during their lives. Males can also get UTIs, as well as children, though they only affect 1% to 2% of children. Healthcare providers treat 8 million to 10 million people each year for UTIs.
Migraine symptoms vary based on the stage. Every migraine is different, and you won’t necessarily experience symptoms during all four stages of every migraine.
Laryngopharyngeal reflux. Some people with GERD also develop LPR, which is reflux that travels into your throat. Acid might sneak up into your throat while you sleep. It can cause swelling, hoarseness and vocal cord growths, and you can also aspirate acid particles into your airways.
Fever.
and societal and individual behavior driven by globalization and industrialized food systems. These forces have created increasingly obesogenic environments,
Mask-like facial expression. Known as hypomimia, this means facial expressions change very little or not at all.
Processed or cured foods (hot dogs, pepperoni).
Age and Gender: Gastric cancer is more common in individuals over the age of 50, with men being more likely to develop the disease than women. As people age, their risk of stomach cancer increases, likely due to the accumulation of genetic mutations over time.
Malignant melanoma is more common among people with a pale complexion, blue eyes, and red or fair hair. Experimental studies have demonstrated a lower minimum erythema dose and more prolonged erythema in melanoma patients than in controls.
Memory
For children aged 5–19 years:
Cold sweats or excessive sweating without physical exertion.
CAD often develops slowly over many years and may show no symptoms until a heart attack occurs, making it a “silent killer.”
Outlook and Final Thoughts
Chronic bone pain
Rhinoviruses cause up to 50% of common colds. There are more than 100 different rhinoviruses. But other types of viruses, such as coronaviruses, can also cause colds. More than 200 different viruses can cause a cold.
Blood in your stool
Fever
Infections (like pneumonia or skin infections)
Advanced prostate cancer can spread beyond the prostate to nearby lymph nodes, bones, or distant organs such as the liver or lungs. This is called metastasis and can lead to complications like:
You are over the age of 50
Many of these treatments take time to work. They can help your symptoms, but your symptoms may not go away completely.
Eat a balanced and varied diet rich in fruits, vegetables, and whole grains	Avoid excessive consumption of processed and red meats
cognitive impairment and memory loss
Asian men tend to have lower rates of prostate cancer, though rates are rising globally due to lifestyle and environmental changes.
Shortness of breath that occurs suddenly or with minimal exertion.
Migraine without headache (silent migraine).
What is the urinary tract?
Most individuals diagnosed with prostate cancer are found to have adenocarcinoma, while the rarer types represent a small fraction of overall cases.
Absence seizures: This seizure type causes a blank stare or “staring into space” (a brief loss of awareness). There may be minor muscle movements, including eye blinking, lip-smacking or chewing motions, hand motions or rubbing fingers. Absence seizures are more common in children, last for only seconds (usually less than 10 seconds) and are commonly mistaken for daydreaming. This seizure type used to be called petit mal seizures.
Symptoms typically worsen or peak during this stage. In addition to the symptoms in stage 1, you may experience:
Surgery is often used in the early stages of cancer if the tumour has not spread to other areas of the body. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy can help shrink the tumour.
Loosening your waistband. Take off your belt or change your pants if it helps.
Risk factors
Several factors are associated with the increasing risk of spread of the dengue epidemic, including the changing distribution of the responsible vectors (chiefly Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus), especially in previously dengue-naive countries; climate change leading to increasing temperatures, high rainfall and humidity; fragile and overburdened health systems; limitations in surveillance and reporting; and political and financial instabilities in countries facing complex humanitarian crises and high population movements.
Acid reflux mostly affects your esophagus, though sometimes it can get into your windpipe or even your airways. A little acid may just feel momentarily uncomfortable. But a lot of acid will injure these organs.
Prevention
Cancer cells can break away from the primary tumor and travel through the lymphatic system, reaching nearby lymph nodes. Once inside the lymph system, cancer cells can circulate and form new tumors in distant nodes or organs.
Frequent urination.
Complications
Parkinson’s disease is a condition where a part of your brain deteriorates, causing more severe symptoms over time. While this condition is best known for how it affects muscle control, balance and movement, it can also cause a wide range of other effects on your senses, thinking ability, mental health and more.
There are many OTC common cold medication options available to treat your symptoms. But some of these medications aren’t safe for children. Check with a healthcare provider before giving your child OTC medications. Be careful not to combine medicines that treat multiple symptoms. You could get too much of some ingredients, which could cause other health problems, including organ damage.
Hepatitis B. This type of hepatitis is the most common liver infection in the world. The hepatitis B virus (HBV) often causes short-term illness. But it can become chronic.
Healthcare providers diagnose Alzheimer’s disease in a few ways. The first step is discussing your current health and medical history.
losing weight
Drug resistance emerges when TB medicines are used inappropriately, through incorrect prescription by health care providers, poor quality drugs, or patients stopping treatment prematurely.
Treat H. pylori infections: Chronic infection with the bacterium Helicobacter pylori is a known risk factor for stomach cancer. If you are diagnosed with an H. pylori infection, it is important to follow through with antibiotic treatment as prescribed by a healthcare provider to eradicate the bacteria and reduce cancer risk.
WHO first recommended collaborative TB/HIV activities to reduce morbidity and mortality from HIV-associated TB in 2004. These activities include bidirectional screening, prevention and treatment of infection and disease. Scale-up of TB treatment and ART since 2005 is estimated to have averted 9.8 million deaths.
Also, make sure you’re drinking plenty of fluids to keep your nose and throat moist. Avoid alcohol and caffeine because they have a drying effect.
What symptoms or changes should I and my loved ones watch out for?
Causes of chemical gastroenteritis include:
Feeling sick to your stomach
Gene therapies and gene-targeted treatments. These treatments target specific mutations that cause Parkinson’s disease. Some also boost the effectiveness of levodopa or other treatments.
quitting tobacco.
Bananas.
Causes
Your use of tobacco products.
Chemical gastroenteritis can happen if you ingest toxic chemicals, which can contaminate food and water sources. You can also get it from heavy doses of alcohol or drugs, including some medications.
There are two main types of inhaler:
Although many causes of epilepsy are out of your control and unpreventable, you can reduce your chance of developing a few conditions that might lead to epilepsy, such as:
IV	Seldom	Always
After a large or fatty meal.
Diagnosis and Tests
Starting treatment as soon as possible is the best way to maintain your brain health throughout your life. But there currently isn’t a treatment available that stops or reverses Alzheimer’s disease.
reducing the fat, sugar and salt content of processed foods;
When to Consult a Doctor About Prostate Cancer
Lecanemab or donanemab
See your provider if your symptoms continue for more than three months or if they’re getting worse. If you have symptoms less often, but they interfere with your life, it’s still a good idea to talk to your primary care provider.
Viral hepatitis symptoms develop over time as the condition progresses. Healthcare providers consider your symptoms and other factors to stage viral hepatitis.
Recurrent cases after radiation
What are the specific causes of acute gastroenteritis?
Prevalence of overweight and obesity
Smoking is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease. It damages the blood vessels, raises blood pressure, and increases the formation of blood clots, all of which contribute to the risk of heart attack.
If you think you have a migraine, discuss your symptoms with a primary care physician (PCP) first. They can diagnose migraine headaches and start treatment. Your PCP may refer you to a headache specialist or a neurologist.
Chest X-ray: Chest X-ray detects and evaluates the severity of a lung infection. When a patient has pneumonia, the affected lung may show up on the chest X-ray as patches.
Stage 3: Late (Days 8 to 10)
Other treatments may also be used:
The four phases and common symptoms of a migraine
A collection of fluid in your lungs.
1. Adenocarcinoma
Ditans (lasmiditan).
Obesity may cause hormonal imbalances and chronic inflammation, both of which can fuel cancer development.
Lose weight if you’re overweight or obese.
Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia is more common in hospitalized patients or following the viral flu. These infections can become severe and difficult to treat as they are resistant to multiple antibiotics.
Parkinson’s disease is a degenerative condition, meaning the effects on your brain get worse over time. However, this condition usually takes time to get worse. Most people have a normal life span with this condition.
Avoid excessive protein consumption
When you have a headache, specific nerves in your blood vessels send pain signals to your brain. This releases inflammatory substances into your head’s nerves and blood vessels. It’s unclear why your nerves do that.
Limit dairy products, like cheese and milk. Lactose intolerance is more common in people with IBS. If you cut back on dairy, make sure to eat nondairy foods rich in calcium, like broccoli, spinach or salmon.
What are peptic ulcer disease symptoms?
Diagnosis and Tests
Risk Factors for Prostate Cancer
Other potential causes of IBS include:
Antipsychotics (neuroleptics). These drugs can treat paranoia, hallucinations and agitation.
Missing a meal.
Using expectorants like guaifenesin make it easier to clear mucus out of your lungs.
Lifestyle changes can help lower high blood pressure and can help anyone with hypertension. Many who make these changes will still need to take medicine.
Drink adequate water daily
This stage indicates a higher risk of progression and may require a combination of treatment approaches.
Stomach cancer
Some conditions have signs and symptoms similar to congestive heart failure. If you have new or worsening nonurgent symptoms, tell your healthcare provider.
A1c: This test, also called HbA1C or glycated hemoglobin test, provides your average blood glucose level over the past two to three months.
Symptoms
While Parkinson’s disease is usually age-related, it can happen in adults as young as 20 (though this is extremely rare, and often people have a parent, full sibling or child with the same condition).
Treatment for people with Stage B heart failure includes:
Pneumonia occurs when bacteria enter the lungs and produce an illness. The immune system’s response to the infection causes inflammation of the air sacs in the lungs (alveoli). The air sacs might eventually fill up with pus and liquids as a result of the inflammation, resulting in pneumonia symptoms. Pneumonia can be caused by a variety of infectious organisms, including bacteria, viruses, and fungus.
Should I adjust my diet while living with peptic ulcer disease?
Tight-fitting clothing can create a moist environment, which promotes bacterial growth. You can try loose-fitting clothing and cotton underwear to prevent moisture from accumulating around your urethra.
Other Neuroendocrine Tumors: Includes large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma
Viral gastroenteritis
The prostate surrounds the urethra, and both the cancer and its treatment can affect bladder control. Some men may experience:
Has trouble breathing.
As prostate cancer progresses, it can spread to nearby tissues, lymph nodes, and bones. Symptoms of advanced prostate cancer may include:
Signs and Symptoms
Avoid gluten. People with IBS — even those without celiac disease — tend to be more sensitive to gluten. If you opt for a gluten-free diet, work with your provider to ensure you’re getting enough of the key vitamins and minerals (like fiber, iron and calcium) often found in foods with gluten.
Depression.
Keep an activity diary. Record the activities that help you manage your IBS and compare notes with your provider.
Prostate MRI (Multiparametric MRI)
a rare genetic condition called alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, which can cause COPD at a young age.
rapid breathing
For advanced cancer: If the cancer is not operable or has spread to other parts of the body, chemotherapy can help control its growth and relieve symptoms.
What is the common cold incubation period?
As ozone levels are depleted, the atmosphere loses more and more of its protective filter function and more solar UV radiation reaches the Earth's surface. It is estimated that a 10 per cent decrease in ozone levels will result in an additional 300,000 non-melanoma and 4,500 melanoma skin cancer cases. The global incidence of melanoma continues to increase – however, the main factors that predispose to the development of melanoma seem to be connected with recreational exposure to the sun and a history of sunburn. These factors lie within each individual's own responsibility.
Sinus infections.
Autonomic nervous system symptoms. These include orthostatic hypotension (low blood pressure when standing up), constipation and gastrointestinal problems, urinary incontinence and sexual dysfunctions.
Enlarged liver. It doesn’t always cause symptoms, but you may have pain or discomfort on the upper right side of your belly.
Recovery time
Total Gastrectomy: In cases where the cancer has spread throughout the stomach, a total gastrectomy may be performed, which involves the removal of the entire stomach. Afterward, the esophagus is connected directly to the small intestine.
People with an abnormal breast lump should seek medical care, even if the lump does not hurt.
Walking pneumonia
Stage 4 (Advanced-stage)	Spread to distant organs	Hormone therapy, chemotherapy, targeted therapy, palliative care
Salmonella.
family history: a family history of colorectal cancer or certain genetic conditions, such as Lynch syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), can increase the risk;
Botulinum toxin type A injections (Botox®).
Parkinson’s disease isn’t fatal, but the symptoms and effects are often contributing factors to death. The average life expectancy for Parkinson’s disease in 1967 was a little under 10 years.
The best thing to do for a urinary tract infection is to see a healthcare provider. You need antibiotics to treat a UTI. Your provider will select an antibiotic that works best against the bacteria responsible for your infection.
Blue lips.
A tuberculin skin test (TST), interferon gamma release assay (IGRA) or newer antigen-based skin test (TBST) can be used to identify people with TB infection. The results from these TB infection tests are used to identify which individuals with a high risk of TB will benefit most from TB preventive treatment.
Urine (pee) is a byproduct of your blood-filtering system, which your kidneys perform. Your kidneys create pee when they remove waste products and excess water from your blood. Pee usually moves through your urinary system without any contamination. However, bacteria can get into your urinary system, which can cause UTIs.
Medications come in different forms, like:
Geriatric Population: Older adults may require adjusted treatment plans to account for comorbidities and medication interactions.
In 2024, an estimated 35 million children under the age of 5 years were overweight (2). Once considered a high-income country problem,
weight loss;
Rehabilitation involves a multidisciplinary approach, including:
The technical name for diabetes is diabetes mellitus. Another condition shares the term “diabetes” — diabetes insipidus — but they’re distinct. They share the name “diabetes” because they both cause increased thirst and frequent urination. Diabetes insipidus is much rarer than diabetes mellitus.
Acid reflux happens when your LES weakens or relaxes enough to let acid pass. Some temporary things can relax your LES, like lying down after a large meal. But if you have GERD, it means your LES is relaxing often.
Definition: What is Myocardial Infarction?
Risk factors for congestive heart failure include:
High Cholesterol:
Radiation uses high-energy rays to kill cancer cells. Common types include:
Anxiety.
Ear pain.
Healthcare providers can usually recognize gastroenteritis by your symptoms. They’ll ask you when your symptoms started and what was going on at the time that could have triggered them.
People with high blood pressure may not feel symptoms. The only way to know is to get your blood pressure checked.
Possible complications include:
overweight is weight-for-height greater than 2 standard deviations above WHO Child Growth Standards median; and
Confirmatory Diagnostic Tests
Individuals experiencing a heart attack may feel unusually tired or weak, even with minimal exertion. This symptom is often more pronounced in women.
Infectious diseases
Ringing in your ears (tinnitus).
Maternal pneumonia is pneumonia that develops during pregnancy. Pregnant women are more susceptible to infections like pneumonia. This is related to the immune system’s natural dampening that occurs during pregnancy.
What can I expect if I have congestive heart failure?
Thrombolytic Therapy (Clot-Busting Drugs):
Breast cancers that independently overexpress a molecule called the HER-2/neu oncogene (HER-2 positive) are amenable to treatment with targeted biological agents such as trastuzumab. When targeted biological therapies are given, they are combined with chemotherapy to make them effective at killing cancer cells.
Stomach ulcers account for almost 20% of peptic ulcers.
But some causes of acute gastroenteritis may need medication to go away. For example, you may need a specific antibiotic or antiparasitic medication to treat a specific type of bacterial or parasite infection.
One study says that people with congestive heart failure have a life span 10 years shorter than those who don’t have heart failure. Another study showed that the survival rates of people with chronic heart failure were:
chronic pain and spasticity
A fever.
Palliative or hospice care.
Laboratory-based and point of care diagnostics are critical to control and manage dengue, yet global disparities in laboratory capabilities present significant challenges. The diagnostic algorithms, testing strategies and test methodologies employed vary, depending on the capabilities of national laboratory systems. The wide range of available tests – including nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) and rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) –  vary significantly in quality and performance.
Acute diabetes complications
A positive biopsy confirms prostate cancer.
Language
chest discomfort
You may want to try alternative therapies to help you manage migraines. These include:
You may have a hard time understanding how close objects around you are from your body or feel less coordinated than usual. This can include:
Diagnosis of Prostate Cancer
Dengue – vector-borne disease rising in tropical regions
Every other day.
Not eating or drinking, which could mean dehydration.
Complications of peptic ulcer disease
Tonic seizures: Tonic means “with tone.” A tonic seizure means your muscle tone has greatly increased. Your arms, legs, back or whole body may be tense or stiff, causing you to fall. You may be aware or have a small change in awareness during this short seizure (usually less than 20 seconds).
It’s very important for you to manage your other health conditions, such as:
Healthy Diet:
Get physically active. Aim for 30 minutes a day at least five days a week.
Management and Treatment
bronchodilators (such as salbutamol), that open the air passages and relieve symptoms; and
Poor Diet:
Applying a cold or warm compress or washcloth to your forehead or behind your neck.
Computed Tomography Scan (CT Scan)  is used to detect and evaluate the structure of the lung and the changes due to pneumonia.
Sneezing.
Children in less developed countries and senior citizens in long-term care facilities are more at risk of serious complications from gastroenteritis. This is because their health status is lower to begin with.
Urethra. The urethra is a tube that carries pee from your bladder to the outside of your body.
Non-modifiable risk factors include a family history of hypertension, age over 65 years and co-existing diseases such as diabetes or kidney disease.
There are some Alzheimer’s risk factors you can’t change or control, like your age and genetics. But you may be able to manage other factors to help reduce your risk. Maintaining your overall health can help protect your brain from cognitive decline. You can try to:
wheezing when exhaling and sometimes when inhaling
Plant toxins, like poisonous mushrooms.
Hormone therapy
People living with HIV are 12 times more likely to fall ill with TB disease than people without HIV. TB is the leading cause of death among people with HIV.
Fatigue or sleepiness.
What causes IBS?
Treatments such as prostatectomy or radiation can impact semen production and ejaculatory function, reducing or eliminating the ability to conceive naturally. Men concerned about fertility may opt for sperm banking before treatment.
Postdrome: The postdrome stage usually lasts for a few hours up to 48 hours. Symptoms feel similar to an alcohol-induced hangover, which is why the postdrome phase is known as a migraine hangover.
If you have IBS, you may have noticed that certain things trigger symptoms. A trigger doesn’t cause the condition itself, but it can cause or worsen a symptom flare-up. Common triggers include:
Prostate cancer is classified based on the type of cells where the cancer originates. The majority of cases involve the glandular cells of the prostate, but a few rare forms also exist.
Blood tests can detect elevated levels of certain enzymes and proteins, such as troponin, which are released when heart muscle is damaged. High levels of these biomarkers indicate a heart attack.
HIV and TB form a lethal combination, each accelerating the other's progress. In 2024, about 150 000 people died of HIV-associated TB. The percentage of people who fell ill with TB and had a documented HIV test result was 82% in 2024. This was a slight increase from 81% in 2023. The WHO African Region has the highest burden of HIV-associated TB. Globally in 2024, only 61% of the estimated number of people living with HIV who developed TB received antiretroviral therapy (ART).
History of alcohol use disorder.
TB mostly affects adults in their most productive years. However, all age groups are at risk. Over 80% of cases and deaths are in low- and middle-income countries.
Anyone, of any age, race or sex, can develop epilepsy.
How is the common cold treated?
Part 1: Non-motor aspects of experiences of daily living. This section deals with non-motor (non-movement) symptoms like dementia, depression, anxiety and other mental ability- and mental health-related issues. It also asks questions about pain, constipation, incontinence, fatigue, etc.
For example, if stress is a trigger, you may want to speak with a mental health professional to help you manage your stress. If you get migraine symptoms when you miss a meal, set an alarm on your phone to remind you to eat meals on a regular schedule.
What is the common cold?
Cost.
Stage B (pre-heart failure) means your left ventricle isn’t working well and/or is structurally abnormal but you’ve never had symptoms of heart failure.
limit consumption of sugar sweetened beverages and energy-dense foods and promote other healthy eating behaviours;
Stages of Parkinson’s disease
You can be contagious for up to two weeks, even spreading a cold a day or two before you have symptoms. But you’re most contagious when your symptoms are at their worst — usually the first three days you feel sick.
Cold viruses can live on objects for several hours. Babies often pick up objects that other babies have touched. If a baby touches something that has cold germs on it, then touches their mouth, eyes or nose, the germs can infect them.
Treatments are more likely to cure the disease in the early stages.
Problems talking or understanding.
At the individual level, people may be able to reduce their risk by adopting preventive interventions at each step of the life cycle, starting from pre-conception and continuing during the early years. These include:
Green vomit.
You should feel better within two to three days after your symptoms first started, or after you started medication if you needed it. If you aren't feeling better yet, let your healthcare provider know.
Heart Failure:
When is flu season?
diabetes (high blood sugar);
Treatment Options for Myocardial Infarction
Lecanemab and donanemab are intravenous (IV) infusions. They’re two types of monoclonal antibodies. These are medications that can help your body’s immune system target and destroy amyloid proteins. They can slow down Alzheimer’s progression by getting rid of some of the amyloid before it damages your brain.
Repetitive movements like eye blinking, lip-smacking or chewing motion, hand rubbing or finger motions.
In most cases obesity is a multifactorial disease due to environmental and psycho-social factors and genetic variants.
Rivastigmine
Causes
Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most prevalent cause of bacterial pneumonia. Other factors to consider are:
Once you identify a trigger, you can take steps to avoid it. This isn’t always possible, but awareness of your triggers is helpful to identify them and treat a migraine when it starts.
Tremor while muscles are at rest. This is a rhythmic shaking of muscles even when you’re not using them and happens in about 80% of Parkinson’s disease cases. Resting tremors are different from essential tremors, which don’t usually happen when muscles are at rest.
seizure
Diagnosis and Tests
High blood pressure (hypertension).
Stage	Description	Typical Treatment Options
Dietary and physical activity patterns are largely the result of environmental and societal conditions that greatly constrain personal choice. Obesity is a societal rather than an individual responsibility, with the solutions to be found through the creation of supportive environments and communities that embed healthy diets and regular physical activity as the most accessible, available and affordable behaviours of daily life.
Chest Pain or Discomfort:
Without treatment, PUD can lead to:
CABG is a surgical procedure in which a blood vessel from another part of the body is used to bypass a blocked coronary artery, restoring blood flow to the heart.
Scope of the problem
High fever (over 103 F/40 C).
Prevention of Prostate Cancer
Management and Treatment
How common is skin cancer?
III	Sometimes	Usually
Asthma
By touching a surface that’s contaminated by the flu virus, then touching your face, nose, mouth or eyes. This includes things like door knobs, desks, computers and phones.
CT scan
Gleason Grading System
A newer, more precise type of radiation that minimizes damage to surrounding tissues like the bladder and rectum. Detailed separately below.
Fibromyalgia.
Part 3: Motor examination. A healthcare provider uses this section to determine the movement-related effects of Parkinson’s disease. The criteria measure effects based on how you speak, facial expressions, stiffness and rigidity, walking gait and speed, balance, movement speed, tremors, etc.
Before surgery (Neoadjuvant chemotherapy): To shrink tumors and make them easier to remove surgically.
Pounding.
Increase fiber in your diet. Fiber-rich foods, including fruits, vegetables, grains, prunes and nuts, can help if you’re struggling with constipation. Introduce fiber slowly into your diet to give your gut time to adjust.
To prevent mosquitoes from breeding:
Geographic variations in incidence rates are observed globally, but these are likely due to differences in diet, healthcare access, and screening awareness.
Pain in your chest or stomach (abdomen) that doesn’t go away.
What causes diabetes?
Many people with IBS also have other chronic pain conditions. Conditions associated with an increased risk of IBS include:
Sinus infections.
Used in:
Waiting. Your provider may suggest a “watch and wait” approach to your symptoms. During this time, it’s a good idea to drink plenty of fluids (especially water) to help flush out your system.
Prehabilitation, including lifestyle-based interventions (exercise, diet and nutritional supplementation and psychological support) between diagnosis and treatment has proven effective in minimizing  complications related to the treatment.
Symptoms last longer than five days.
Living With
You have flu symptoms and an underlying condition that puts you at higher risk for severe illness.
speech – slurred or strange speech.
Due to their relative lack of skin pigmentation Caucasian populations generally have a much higher risk of getting non-melanoma or melanoma skin cancers than dark-skinned populations. Naturally brown and black people (skin types V, VI – see table) can usually safely tolerate relatively high levels of sun exposure without getting sunburnt or greatly increasing their skin cancer risk. In contrast, people with pale or freckled skin, fair or red hair and blue eyes belong to the highest risk group (skin types I, II); people with dark hair and eyes who do not normally get sunburnt are at medium risk of developing skin cancer (skin types III, IV). Nevertheless excessive exposure to intense sunlight can damage all skin types - the risk of eye damage and heat stroke is the same for everyone!
Fatigue or Weakness:
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I) or an angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) if you have coronary artery disease, diabetes, high blood pressure or other vascular or cardiac conditions.
Antidepressants (if you have depression and anxiety along with significant abdominal pain). Medications include tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).
There are vaccines that prevent viral hepatitis A and B. You can reduce your risk of developing other types of viral hepatitis if you:
Smoking has been associated with an increased risk of aggressive prostate cancer and poorer outcomes.
Common symptoms include diarrhoea, constipation, blood in the stool, abdominal pain, unexplained weight loss, fatigue, and low iron levels.
fatigue
Yes. The two most important things you can do are:
Meal changes
An overall decline in physical health
Memory issues from AD are different and more serious than occasionally forgetting where you left your phone or wondering if you locked the door when you came home.
1. Erectile Dysfunction
Stages of pneumonia
Other risk factors that may make you more likely to experience a migraine include:
Taking acetaminophen (Tylenol®) or NSAIDs (Advil®, Motrin®, Aleve®) can help lower your fever and relieve head and body aches.
Symptoms and Causes
30% for 10 years.
Surgery and devices
Fatigue
Procedures like angioplasty (stent) or bypass surgery
Sharp foods, like chips.
How common is epilepsy?
Any history of chemotherapy and/or radiation.
Types of congestive heart failure
Most of the effects and symptoms are manageable with treatment, but the treatments become less effective and more complicated over time. Living independently will also become more and more difficult as the disease worsens.
IBS with constipation (IBS-C): Most of your poop is hard and lumpy.
During your menstrual cycle, it’s also a good idea to regularly change your period products, including pads and tampons. You should also avoid using any deodorants on your vagina.
Procedures
Lip-smacking, chewing motion, rubbing hands, finger motions.
Helicobacter pylori infection
Blood pressure goal is less than 130/80 if you have:
If you use lubricant during sex, make sure it’s water-based. You should also avoid spermicide if you have frequent UTIs.
Pressure in the lower part of your pelvis.
About 70% of people become seizure-free with proper treatment within a few years. The remaining 30% are considered to have drug-resistant epilepsy. These people should go to an epilepsy center to determine if they’re candidates for epilepsy surgery.
Advanced cancers can erode through the skin to cause open sores (ulceration) but are not necessarily painful. Women with breast wounds that do not heal should seek medical care to have a biopsy performed.
1. Active Surveillance (Watchful Waiting)
By touching the hands or face of someone who has the flu, then touching your face, nose, mouth or eyes.
ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI): A more severe type of heart attack caused by a complete blockage of a coronary artery. It is usually diagnosed by changes in the ECG (electrocardiogram) of the heart.
Symptoms can include coughing, wheezing, shortness of breath and chest tightness. These symptoms can be mild or severe and can come and go over time.
reducing and managing stress
The differences are important. Certain treatments only work for specific types of IBS.
The most common symptoms include:
CT (Computed Tomography) scan – to check pelvic lymph nodes and nearby organs
Drinking plenty of fluids
Long-term diabetes complications
How long does Parkinson’s disease last?
Your healthcare provider will ask you or your family member (who’s witnessed your seizure) if you experienced any of the following during a seizure:
Taking a sip of water. Don’t drink a lot, but small sips may help wash the acid down.
Symptoms of Prostate Cancer
This is the most common initial screening tool. PSA is a protein produced by both normal and cancerous prostate tissue. Elevated levels may suggest cancer, but can also be caused by benign conditions like Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH) or prostatitis.
Damage from injuries. Repeated head injuries, such as those from high-impact or contact sports like boxing, football, hockey, etc., can cause brain damage. The term for this is “post-traumatic parkinsonism.”
Cardiogenic Shock:
lung cancer
Your provider will also use a few tests, including:
Main complication: Heart attack; others include heart failure and abnormal heart rhythms.
That depends on your situation. For example, your body can fight off hepatitis A and hepatitis E infections without medication. Medication can cure hepatitis C. But hepatitis B and hepatitis D are chronic diseases. You may need medication to keep them from getting worse.
Diagnosis
Avoid tobacco use: Smoking is a major risk factor for many cancers, including stomach cancer. Quitting smoking can significantly reduce the risk of developing the disease. Avoiding exposure to secondhand smoke is also important.
Breast cancer cells begin inside the milk ducts and/or the milk-producing lobules of the breast. The earliest form (in situ) is not life-threatening and can be detected in early stages. Cancer cells can spread into nearby breast tissue (invasion). This creates tumours that cause lumps or thickening.
Healthcare providers can suggest treatments to manage symptoms, but there’s no cure for Alzheimer’s disease. Talk to a provider if you’re worried you or a loved one have AD symptoms.
Sleep problems.
Having an inactive (sedentary) lifestyle.
confusion
Trouble thinking and focusing (Parkinson’s-related dementia).
Cholinesterase inhibitors
shoulder pain
Parasitic infection.
Can peptic ulcer disease be prevented?
Diagnosis and Tests
Try the low FODMAP diet. This food plan reduces the amount of hard-to-digest carbohydrates you eat. It recommends alternatives that allow you to get the nutrients you need while going easier on your GI tract.
loss of independence and reduced ability to perform daily activities.
Fatty foods increase stomach acid and take longer to digest, so there’s more opportunity for acid to escape. If you have a heavier meal for dinner, it might not have time to digest before you lie down.
Fatigue.
Talk to your healthcare provider if you’re pregnant or plan on becoming pregnant and experience migraines. Your provider might suggest avoiding medications for migraines when you’re pregnant or if you think you may be pregnant. Some medications can negatively affect the fetus’s development.
Medication treatments for Parkinson’s disease fall into two categories: Direct treatments and symptom treatments. Direct treatments target Parkinson’s itself. Symptom treatments only treat certain effects of the disease.
While these countries continue to deal with the problems of infectious diseases and undernutrition, they are also experiencing a rapid upsurge in noncommunicable disease risk factors such as obesity and overweight.
Other health conditions you have.
Urbanization is associated with increased asthma prevalence, probably due to multiple lifestyle factors.
Focal onset aware seizure means you’re awake and aware during the seizure. Healthcare providers once called this a simple partial seizure. Symptoms may include:
Who is most at risk of getting skin cancer?
Your provider will suggest medications or other treatments to manage specific symptoms as they develop. You may need:
Hyoscyamine (Levsin®).
Over 390 million children and adolescents aged 5–19 years were overweight in 2022.
Clostridioides difficile (C. diff).
Benzodiazepines, a type of sedative.
Dehydration.
changes in bowel habits such as diarrhoea, constipation, or narrowing of the stool
This is usually a temporary (acute) response to a temporary threat or injury. It takes a short time to work, and then, the inflammation goes away. Longer-lasting (persistent) gastroenteritis is unusual.
Behavior and personality
Uncontrolled muscle jerking, usually in arms or legs.
Environmental factors (something about where you live, work or spend a lot of time)
Cancer has grown beyond the prostate capsule and may have spread to nearby tissues, such as the seminal vesicles.
Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY): MODY, also called monogenic diabetes, happens due to an inherited genetic mutation that affects how your body makes and uses insulin. There are currently over 10 different types of MODY. It affects up to 5% of people with diabetes and commonly runs in families.
Migraines are different for each person. They’re temporary but recurring throughout your life. There’s also no available cure. Your healthcare provider can help you manage migraines so they go away faster and are less intense. It may take time to find a treatment option that’s right for you. Let your healthcare provider know if your symptoms improve or get worse.
Hepatitis D. You get hepatitis D along with hepatitis B. The viruses take turns duplicating in your body. Hepatitis D has three stages based on the virus’s activity.
Screening Tests
The most common cause for hepatitis A is food poisoning. That can happen if you eat food or drink water that contains traces of contaminated poop. You can also get it from sharing needles or having unprotected sex with someone who has the virus.
Possible implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) therapy.
Exercise: Physical activity increases insulin sensitivity (and helps reduce insulin resistance), so regular exercise is an important part of management for all people with diabetes.
Asthma cannot be cured but there are several treatments available. The most common treatment is to use an inhaler, which delivers medication directly to the lungs.
You have previously elevated PSA levels or abnormal test results
Overweight and obesity result from an imbalance of energy intake (diet) and energy expenditure (physical activity).
Viral hepatitis happens when you have exposure to any of the viruses that cause it. That can happen if you have contact with bodily fluids like blood and pee from someone who has the virus.
Fungal infection.
If your infection doesn’t respond to treatment, a provider may order the following tests to examine your urinary tract for a disease or injury:
Electroencephalography (EEG): This test measures the electrical activity in your brain. Certain abnormal electrical patterns are related to seizures.
Dengue is treated through pain management as there is no specific treatment currently.
Hemophilus influenza vaccine or Hib vaccine prevents pneumonia due to Hemophilus influenza.
Digital Rectal Examination (DRE)
Symptoms of viral hepatitis
Stages of care
Calcium stones – most common type
Cystoscopy. A cystoscopy uses a cystoscope to look inside your bladder through your urethra. A cystoscope is a thin instrument with a lens and a light at the end.
Advanced-Stage Symptoms
avoiding exposure to environmental risk factors.
occupational therapy to enhance the ability to perform daily activities such as bathing, dressing, and cooking;
Difficulty urinating or new urinary obstruction
People with asthma and their families need education to understand more about their asthma. This includes their treatment options, triggers to avoid, and how to manage their symptoms at home.
Nausea.
swollen glands
How is diabetes managed?
heart failure, which occurs when the heart cannot pump enough blood and oxygen to other vital body organs; and
Hepatitis E isn’t contagious. You may have exposure to the virus by drinking water that contains traces of poop from someone with the virus, eating undercooked meat or being born to someone who has the virus.
Prevention and control
Among the potential complications are:
Radiation Therapy
COPD isn’t curable, but it can get better by not smoking, avoiding air pollution and getting vaccines. It can be treated with medicines, oxygen and pulmonary rehabilitation.
Stress:
You can’t prevent all migraines. But you can take preventive migraine medications as directed by your healthcare provider to reduce how often and how severe migraine symptoms affect you. You can also learn more about your triggers and work with your healthcare provider to avoid them.
Medications to stop migraines: You can take these medications at the first sign of a migraine. They stop or reduce migraine symptoms like pain, nausea, sensitivity and more.
Common symptoms of TB are:
Gray hepatization – It is a term used to describe the process of a person’ Red blood cells are starting to break down, but immune cells are still present. The hue of red blood cells changes from red to grey as they break down.
Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces like door knobs, handles, keyboards, remotes, mobile phones and other items that are frequently touched by hands.
Metabolic syndrome.
Diagnosis and Tests
IBS with mixed bowel habits (IBS-M): You have both hard and lumpy bowel movements and loose and watery movements.
Symptoms of diabetes include:
Becoming a chronic disease
Not peeing or peeing very little.
Pale or clay-colored poop
Smoking:
Less common causes of peptic ulcer disease include:
Minor urinary tract infections can sometimes get better on their own. However, most UTIs need antibiotics to go away. You absolutely need antibiotics if you have a UTI as well as:
Dihydroergotamine (prochlorperazine).
1. Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD)
Obesity and Physical Inactivity:
Influenza pandemic (flu)
Pain relievers: Acetaminophen (Tylenol®) and NSAIDs such as ibuprofen (Advil®) may relieve headaches and fever.
Female gender is the strongest breast cancer risk factor. Approximately 99% of breast cancers occur in women and 0.5–1% of breast cancers occur in men. The treatment of breast cancer in men follows the same principles of management as for women.
Psychiatric and mental health evaluations
Trouble breathing
Although you can't eliminate the risk completely, these proactive steps can help reduce your chances of developing prostate cancer and support better health outcomes if diagnosed early.
You may not have much appetite with gastroenteritis, and that’s natural. Your irritated stomach and intestines won’t be able to digest or absorb many of the foods that you would normally eat anyway.
Bronchodilator inhalers are the most important medicines for treating COPD. They relax the airways to keep them open.
Pneumonia is a lung infection that causes the air sacs in one or both lungs to become inflamed. Cough with phlegm or pus, fever, chills, and trouble breathing can occur when the air sacs fill with fluid or pus (purulent material). Pneumonia can be caused by a variety of species, including bacteria, viruses, and fungus.
These lifestyle changes can help prevent and lower high blood pressure.
Nausea.
Laparoscopic Prostatectomy
Once you get a prescription for antibiotics, it’s very important that you follow the directions for taking them. Be sure to take the full course of antibiotics, even if your symptoms go away and you start feeling better. If you don’t finish all your medicine, the infection can return and be more challenging to treat.
Calcium channel blockers, which treat high blood pressure.
These tests can help your provider look for signs of amyloid proteins and see if they have damaged your brain.
blood in vomit or stool
Globally, about 50% of people treated for TB and their households face total costs (direct medical expenditures, non-medical expenditures and indirect costs such as income losses) that are catastrophic (>20% of total household income). This is far from the target of the WHO End TB Strategy of zero. Those with compromised immune systems, such as people living with HIV, undernutrition or diabetes, or people who use tobacco have a higher risk of falling ill. Globally in 2024, there were an estimated 0.97 million new TB cases that were attributable to undernutrition, 0.93 million to diabetes, 0.74 million to alcohol use disorders, 0.70 million to smoking and 0.57 million to HIV infection.
Surgical removal of testicles (Orchiectomy) – A permanent hormone-blocking option
Astrovirus.
indoor air pollution: biomass fuel (wood, animal dung, crop residue) or coal is frequently used for cooking and heating in low- and middle-income countries with high levels of smoke exposure;
Your symptoms are gradually worsening
Stopping the use of tobacco products.
Common Signs of Recurrence:
Glucose (sugar) mainly comes from carbohydrates in your food and drinks. It’s your body’s go-to source of energy. Your blood carries glucose to all your body’s cells to use for energy.
Someone with Alzheimer’s might seem confused or like they’re taking an unusually long time to make a choice or decision. This can affect your ability to:
shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, sometimes even when resting
The symptoms people get depend on which part of the body is affected by TB. While TB usually affects the lungs, it can also involve the kidneys, brain, spine and skin.
US$ 22 billion are needed annually for TB prevention, diagnosis, treatment and care to achieve global targets by 2027 agreed on at the 2023 UN high level-TB meeting.
high fever (40°C/104°F)
Parkinson’s disease symptoms, including non-motor and motor-related
People with diabetes are at an increased risk of myocardial infarction due to higher blood sugar levels, which can damage blood vessels over time. Diabetes is also associated with higher levels of cholesterol and blood pressure, which further increase the risk.
Infectious gastroenteritis is caused by an infection in your gastrointestinal tract, like a:
Esophageal manometry. This test measures the muscle activity in your esophagus, using pressure sensors embedded in a nasogastric tube. It can confirm if your LES or other muscles aren’t working right.
Severe lung infection (pneumonia). Pneumonia can lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and other life-threatening conditions.
Feeling faint, dizzy, or lightheaded can occur when blood flow to the brain is reduced. This is a common symptom of a heart attack, especially in the early stages.
Using tobacco products, cocaine or alcohol.
Radiation therapy treats residual microscopic cancers left behind in the breast tissue and/or lymph nodes and minimizes the chances of cancer recurring on the chest wall.
When should I go to ER?
Moraxella catarrhalis is seen as a part of the harmless bacteria of our mouth and throat. But it can cause pneumonia in children and adults with other lung diseases like Asthma and COPD. Usually, it causes ear infections and sinusitis in children.
The most common antibiotics used are:
Urethra (urethritis).
Diagnosis and treatment
Who is at higher risk for complications from the flu?
Medicines to treat breast cancers are selected based on the biological properties of the cancer as determined by special tests (tumour marker determination). The great majority of drugs used for breast cancer are already on the WHO Essential Medicines List (EML).
7. Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs)
Early diagnosis is key to effective treatment. If caught in its early stages, prostate cancer is one of the most treatable cancers. Don’t delay medical attention if symptoms persist or raise concern.
Brain / Neurological Diseases
Global burden
Antihistamines: Diphenhydramine (Benadryl®) and other antihistamines may stop sneezing and a runny nose.
Your provider may also order blood tests and imaging tests (such as a CT scan or an MRI) to make sure there aren’t any other causes for your headache. An electroencephalogram (EEG) may help your provider rule out other conditions.
nausea
People with these severe symptoms should seek care immediately.
What is the difference between Parkinson’s disease vs. parkinsonism?
dispose of solid waste properly and remove artificial habitats that can hold water;
Surgery is a key component in the treatment plan for stomach cancer. It involves removing part or all of the stomach, nearby lymph nodes, and sometimes other surrounding tissues. This
Diagnostic tests for pneumonia detect the presence of pneumonia, the microorganism causing the infection and the extent of damage to the lungs. Diagnosis is also essential to limit the spread of infection, to understand its severity and also as a guide to the treatment that is to be given.
a family history of skin cancer
harmful use of alcohol.
The exact reasons for racial disparities are still being studied.
Can a UTI go away on its own?
Statins help lower cholesterol levels and reduce the risk of further plaque buildup in the arteries.
targeted therapy
4. Diet and Nutrition
Uncontrolled muscle movements, muscle jerking, loss of muscle tone.
The two tests use the following methods.
undernutrition;
This approach avoids overtreatment in cases where the cancer may never progress or cause symptoms.
Feeling extremely tired (fatigue).
What can I expect if I have viral hepatitis?
Postdrome symptoms
weakened immune system (for example, from HIV);
obesity is a BMI greater than or equal to 30.
Fatty liver disease (FLD) means you have extra fat in your liver. You might hear your doctor call it hepatic steatosis. Most of the time, it doesn't cause symptoms, but over time a buildup of fat makes it harder for your liver to work.
Small Cell Carcinoma (a type of neuroendocrine tumor): Aggressive and fast-growing, often diagnosed at a more advanced stage
Unexplained weight loss.
Complications or side effects possible with treatments
Chemotherapy
Chemical gastroenteritis isn’t contagious. But it can affect many people in one place at one time. If you get toxic poisoning from food, water or your environment, others sharing those things may also get it.
Signs and symptoms
Are under 19 years old and take aspirin regularly.
Numbness and tingling.
Is there a cure for epilepsy?
A full (bloated) or hard stomach.
For now, Parkinson’s disease isn’t curable, but there are multiple ways to manage its symptoms. The treatments can also vary from person to person, depending on their specific symptoms and how well certain treatments work. Medications are the primary way to treat this condition.
There aren’t vaccines for all types of viral hepatitis. But there are ways to reduce the risk you’ll get those viruses. Start by understanding how the viruses spread.
Diagnosing myocardial infarction involves a combination of clinical evaluation, laboratory tests, and imaging studies. A healthcare provider will assess the patient’s symptoms, medical history, and risk factors, and may conduct several tests to confirm the diagnosis.
Mycoplasma pneumoniae is a bacterium that causes pneumonia.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Impact
Outlook / Prognosis
Blood Tests:
The pain from a heart attack can radiate to the left arm, neck, jaw, back, or stomach. Some people may experience discomfort in these areas without chest pain.
Part 4: Motor complications. This section involves a provider determining how much of an impact the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease are affecting your life. That includes both the amount of time you have certain symptoms each day, and whether or not those symptoms affect how you spend your time.
If PSA levels are high, the test may be repeated to confirm results.
Asthma is a chronic lung disease affecting people of all ages. It is caused by inflammation and muscle tightening around the airways, which makes it harder to breathe.
Many conditions look like Parkinson’s disease but are instead parkinsonism (which refers to Parkinson’s disease-like conditions) from a specific cause like some psychiatric medications.
Lifestyle changes like eating a healthier diet, quitting tobacco and being more active can help lower blood pressure. Some people may still need to take medicines.
Key functions of the prostate include:
Genetic changes
Get emergency care if you have:
Protect yourself from lung infections:
Preventive Measures for Gastric (Stomach) Cancer
Acute coronary syndrome: Sudden blockage causing a heart attack.
Unfortunately, congestive heart failure usually gets worse over time. As it worsens, you may have more or different signs or symptoms.
Sulfonamides (sulfa drugs), such as sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim.
Kidneys. Kidneys are small, bean-shaped organs on the back of your body, above your hips. Most people have two kidneys. They filter water and waste products from your blood, which becomes pee. Common wastes include urea and creatinine.
Status migrainosus.
radiotherapy (radiation)
Nausea and vomiting.
Epilepsy is a long-term (chronic) disease that causes repeated seizures due to abnormal electrical signals produced by damaged brain cells. A burst of uncontrolled electrical activity within brain cells causes a seizure. Seizures can include changes to your awareness, muscle control (your muscles may twitch or jerk), sensations, emotions and behavior.
This type is less common, affecting about 5% of people living in the U.S., and is caused by drinking alcohol. For this reason, it usually gets better if you stop drinking alcohol soon enough. If you keep drinking, ALD can cause serious problems that progress in stages:
Temporary conditions can cause temporary acid reflux. But GERD is a constant, mechanical problem. It means that the mechanisms that are supposed to keep acid out of your esophagus aren’t working right.
Blood sugar monitoring: Monitoring your blood sugar (glucose) is key to determining how well your current treatment plan is working. It gives you information on how to manage your diabetes on a daily — and sometimes even hourly — basis. You can monitor your levels with frequent checks with a glucose meter and finger stick and/or with a continuous glucose monitor (CGM). You and your healthcare provider will determine the best blood sugar range for you.
There are two main types of FLD:
Non-motor symptoms
Hepatitis E. The hepatitis E virus (HEV) typically goes away without treatment. But you’ll need treatment if you’re pregnant. Hepatitis E in pregnancy can cause pregnancy complications or liver failure.
night sweats
common cold
You’ll need regular check-ups with your healthcare provider after you’ve been diagnosed with AD. Your provider will monitor the condition’s progression and adjust your treatments as needed.
Managing Chronic Conditions:
Is pneumonia curable?
Changes in hearing, vision, taste, smell, feelings of numbness or tingling.
Acute diabetes complications that can be life-threatening include:
Acupuncture.
Stress.
Pregnancy. Pregnancy is a common cause of temporary acid reflux. The pressure and volume in your abdomen can push, stretch and weaken the muscles in your diaphragm that support your LES. Pregnancy hormones may also encourage your LES to relax. Pregnancy brings high levels of the hormone relaxin, which relaxes your muscles so they can stretch to make room for the fetus. It also brings high levels of estrogen and progesterone, which may also relax your LES.
Developmental disorders. Birth abnormalities affecting the brain are a frequent cause of epilepsy, particularly in people whose seizures aren’t controlled with anti-seizure medications. Some birth abnormalities known to cause epilepsy include focal cortical dysplasia, polymicrogyria and tuberous sclerosis. There’s a wide range of other brain malformations known to cause epilepsy.
Prevention
Decongestants: You can use medications like pseudoephedrine (Contac Cold 12 Hour® and Sudafed®).
Asthma symptoms. GERD can trigger asthma-like symptoms, like chronic coughing, wheezing and shortness of breath. If acid particles get into your airways, it can make them contract.
Include foods high in antioxidants, such as berries, nuts, and leafy greens	Limit intake of pickled and salt-preserved foods
Chocolate.
Overall health
Congestion – The lungs appear thick and clogged. Infectious organisms have accumulated in the fluid that has accumulated in the air sacs.
Avoiding migraine triggers.
Frequent urge to urinate
The best common cold self-care remedy is to get plenty of rest. Consider taking time off from work or school for at least the first few days of illness. Not only will you have more time to rest, but you’ll avoid spreading germs to others.
Temporary loss of awareness or consciousness.
Maintain a healthy weight: Obesity is associated with a higher risk of aggressive prostate cancer. Aim for a healthy body mass index (BMI).
Alzheimer’s disease affects everyone differently. Most people older than 65 with Alzheimer’s die within four to eight years of being diagnosed. But some people live for decades, especially if they were diagnosed before turning 65.
As a preparatory step before radiation
Management and Treatment
What are the types of migraines?
ensure appropriate weight gain during pregnancy;
How is viral hepatitis treated?
Treatment (High-Level)
You may lose your ability to control your body. This can increase your risk of:
Fever and chills (if infection is present)
Rarely, they can appear in other parts of your digestive tract:
If you get UTIs a lot, a provider may recommend that you take antibiotics:
Causes of congestive heart failure include:
Complications of uncontrolled hypertension
Prevention
Some people will have worse symptoms when they have a cold or during changes in the weather. Other triggers can include dust, smoke, fumes, grass and tree pollen, animal fur and feathers, strong soaps and perfume.
Diagnosis and Tests
Foods don’t cause peptic ulcers, but some can make symptoms worse, especially spicy or acidic foods. Alcohol and smoking can also aggravate ulcers. Avoid these if you have symptoms or a history of peptic ulcer disease.
Surgery is often used in the early stages of lung cancer if the tumour has not spread to other areas of the body. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy can help shrink the tumour.
Lifestyle choices such as smoking and heavy alcohol use may also play a role by introducing carcinogens into the body that can damage cellular DNA over time.
What are the first signs of gastroenteritis?
With diet and exercise, fatty liver disease can be reversed. (Photo Credit: iStock/Getty Images)
Treatment varies depending on factors like the type of virus you have and your symptoms. There are treatments to manage viral hepatitis symptoms. A healthcare provider may prescribe an antiviral medication if you have hepatitis B and hepatitis C.
Family history of kidney stones
Clonic seizures: “Clonus” means fast, repeating stiffening and relaxing of a muscle (“jerking”). A clonic seizure happens when muscles continuously jerk for seconds to a minute or muscles stiffen followed by jerking for seconds up to two minutes.
Aspirin is often administered immediately during a heart attack to reduce blood clotting and prevent further blockage of the coronary arteries.
Prodrome: The first phase begins up to 24 hours before you experience a headache.
Common Symptoms:
How long will I have to take anti-epileptic medications?
Chemotherapy is often the first-line treatment for the majority of patients around the world and involves the use of drugs that circulate throughout the body to kill cancer cells. Combination chemotherapy regimens are commonly used, and the choice of drugs depends on factors such as the histological type of the cancer and the patient's general health conditions. Targeted therapy, designed to block the signalling pathways that drive the growth of cancer cells, is an important option for patients with specific genetic mutations or biomarkers identified in their tumour. Immunotherapy, specifically immune checkpoint inhibitors, has revolutionized the treatment of metastatic lung cancer. These drugs help to stimulate the immune system to recognize and attack cancer cells. Local treatments, such as radiation therapy and surgery, may be used to manage specific metastatic sites or alleviate symptoms caused by tumour growth.
Exercise regularly. Aim for 150 minutes of moderate exercise weekly. This is about 30 minutes a day, five days a week. “Moderate” means you’re raising your heart rate.
Fever or cough that gets better or goes away but then get worse.
Human-to-mosquito transmission
Throbbing.
Lung cancer is a type of cancer that starts when abnormal cells grow in an uncontrolled way in the lungs. It is a serious health issue that can cause severe harm and death.
Complications of Prostate Cancer
Use a condom during sex
Men are at a higher risk of experiencing a heart attack at an earlier age compared to women. However, the risk for women increases significantly after menopause, due to the decrease in protective estrogen levels.
Although research into their effectiveness is ongoing, your provider may recommend probiotics. These “good bacteria” may help relieve IBS symptoms.
One modelling estimate indicates 390 million dengue virus infections per year, of which 96 million manifest clinically(1).A recent study on the prevalence of dengue estimates that 5.6 billion people are at risk of infection with dengue and other arboviruses(2).
Alzheimer’s disease symptoms include a decline in reasoning, memory, language and mood
Parkinson’s disease causes a specific area of your brain, the basal ganglia, to deteriorate. As this area deteriorates, you lose the abilities those areas once controlled. Researchers have uncovered that Parkinson’s disease causes a major shift in your brain chemistry.
After bending over.
Migraine headache pain may feel like the following:
Complications of congestive heart failure treatments may include:
Colorectal Cancer – affecting digestive tract
What migraine treatments are available during pregnancy?
pressure ulcers
Some practices can help prevent pneumonia and serious illness.
Several medications treat specific symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. Symptoms treated often include the following:
Avoiding migraine triggers
Kidney disease.
Difficulty concentrating.
Rarely, people need surgery for ulcers that don’t heal or that keep coming back. This can involve:
Have you been sick or had a stressful event in your life recently?
Gender:
pre-existing cardiac conditions (e.g. atrial fibrillation, heart failure), and chronic kidney disease.
Bedsores
Most people will not experience any symptoms when the cancer is still early hence the importance of early detection.
A diagnosis of overweight or obesity is made by measuring people’s weight and height and by calculating the body mass index (BMI): weight (kg)/height² (m²).
Antiseizure medications. These medications can also sometimes treat mood changes.
How common is congestive heart failure?
If you have other health conditions.
Treatment for people with Stage C HFrEF includes:
chest tightness, making it difficult to breathe deeply.
Transitional Cell Carcinoma: Typically starts in the bladder and may spread to the prostate
Limit consumption of smoked, salted, and pickled foods: These foods contain compounds, such as nitrates and nitrites, which may increase the risk of stomach cancer. Processed meats, like bacon and sausages, are also associated with a higher risk.
How long is gastroenteritis contagious?
Most breast lumps are not cancer. Breast lumps that are cancerous are more likely to be successfully treated when they are small and have not spread to nearby lymph nodes.
targeted therapy
What is the medical treatment for gastroenteritis?
VI	Naturally black skin
The less common causes of bacterial pneumonia are:
Common tests to identify congestive heart failure, its stage and its cause include:
If you have chemical gastroenteritis due to toxic poisoning, you may need additional treatment to help clear the toxin out of your body. The treatment will depend on the toxin and on your condition.
weakness;
Suppository.
Outlook / Prognosis
Shortness of breath.
There are by modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors for stroke.
Alcoholic cirrhosis. This is a buildup of scar tissue that stops the liver from functioning normally. It can cause the same symptoms as alcoholic hepatitis, plus:
Things that increase the risk of having high blood pressure include:
treating high blood pressure
Sleeping on your left side. This positions your lower esophageal sphincter in an air pocket above your stomach contents. Lying on your back or your right side submerges the valve.
Causes of diabetes include:
genetics
You may have heard that supplements and herbal remedies, such as zinc, vitamin C and echinacea can treat and prevent colds.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a condition in which the body’s This is the most serious type of respiratory failure. It’s a medical situation that requires immediate attention.
Sodium-glucose transport 2 inhibitors (SGLT2i).
Many people can manage the symptoms of flu at home with over-the-counter (OTC) medications and other therapies, including:
Heart surgery.
Not smoking tobacco is the best way to prevent lung cancer.
Fast or labored breathing.
6. Smoking and Lifestyle
It’s very common. Experts estimate that about 10% to 15% of adults in the United States have IBS. Only about 5% to 7% see a provider and receive a diagnosis.
Try relaxation techniques. Daily yoga, meditation and other de-stressing techniques can help calm an overtaxed nervous system and a “nervous gut.” Sometimes, a behavioral therapist can help.
Dengue (break-bone fever) is a viral infection that is spread from mosquitoes to people. It is more common in tropical and subtropical than in temperate climates.
Outlook / Prognosis
Symptoms
A doctor manually checks the prostate by inserting a gloved, lubricated finger into the rectum to feel for abnormal growths or nodules.
Did anything make your headache better or worse?
The strategies for improving breast cancer outcomes depend on fundamental health system strengthening to deliver the treatments that are already known to work. These are also important for the management of other cancers and other noncommunicable diseases (NCDs).
What are the types of epilepsies and their seizure symptoms?
Yes, migraines tend to run in biological families. Up to 80% of people with migraines have a first-degree biological relative with the condition.
Standing up. Gravity is on your side.
Hepatitis B can spread through unprotected sex, sharing needles or syringes, or during childbirth, when it can pass to the newborn.
Communication challenges between your brain and gut can cause:
engage in regular physical activity.
Who is at risk?
Sports drinks or hydration formulas.
Right-sided heart failure.
Is it contagious?
The most common types of lung cancer are non-small cell carcinoma (NSCLC) and small cell carcinoma (SCLC). NSCLC is more common and grows slowly, while SCLC is less common but often grows quickly.
What causes the common cold?
Erectile dysfunction
Restriction of sodium (salt) in your diet.
eat foods high in saturated or trans fats
Dietary Factors: A diet high in salty, smoked, or pickled foods, and low in fruits and vegetables, can increase the risk of developing gastric cancer. The consumption of processed meats and food with high levels of nitrates is also linked to an elevated risk. Additionally, a low intake of antioxidants like vitamin C can make the stomach lining more susceptible to cancer-causing substances.
Memory loss is the most common Alzheimer’s symptom. It can affect your ability to recall recent events (short-term memory) or things that happened a long time ago (long-term memory).
Talk to a mental health professional if you need support. It’s extremely common for people with AD and their loved ones to feel extra stress and anxiety, especially right after diagnosis. Those feelings are real and valid. A mental healthcare provider can help you process your thoughts and emotions.
Lifestyle changes.
A dry, hacking cough.
Seizures
Ear pain.
Long-term exposure to toxins, such as cigarette smoke or environmental chemicals
What are the risk factors for a migraine?
Blood in the urine (hematuria) or blood in semen (hematospermia)
change in nipple appearance or the skin surrounding the nipple (areola)
Facts
Coronary artery disease.
Back to video
Malignant melanoma
Lung cancer is a significant public health concern, causing a considerable number of deaths globally. GLOBOCAN 2020 estimates of cancer incidence and mortality produced by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) show as lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer death, with an estimated 1.8 million deaths (18%) in 2020.
a) Advanced disease. Systemic therapy is the primary treatment approach for metastatic colorectal cancer, as it aims to treat cancer cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy is often used as the first-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer. Combination chemotherapy regimens are commonly used to kill cancer cells or slow down their growth. Targeted therapy may be used in combination with chemotherapy for patients with specific genetic mutations, such as KRAS or BRAF mutations. Immunotherapy drugs may be considered for patients with tumours that exhibit specific genetic markers, such as microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) or mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR).
Jejunal ulcers: These can occur after surgery that connects your stomach to your jejunum (gastrojejunostomy).
Temporary confusion, slowed thinking, problems with talking and understanding.
Breathing problems – When you breathe, you can have difficulties receiving enough oxygen. It’s possible that you’ll need to utilize a ventilator.
Diarrhea so severe it wakes you up at night.
Sore throat.
You may not have all of these symptoms.
Sputum Culture/Gram Stain: Primary test to identify the bacterial cause of pneumonia. Culture can also identify the antibiotics to which the bacterial agent is susceptible.
There are many things you can do as you recover:
Every day.
Echocardiogram:
High blood pressure
anxiety
Long-term use of certain medications can also lead to Type 2 diabetes, including HIV/AIDS medications and corticosteroids.
Outlook / Prognosis
Symptoms can be caused by other conditions as well. People with symptoms should talk to a healthcare provider.
Do:
Stroke
Air Pollution:
4. Hormone Therapy (Androgen Deprivation Therapy – ADT)
Hepatitis D. People who have hepatitis B may get hepatitis D. The hepatitis D virus (HDV) needs HBV to survive and spread.
Supportive medications for fatigue, urinary issues, and pain
assess the weight and height of people accessing health facilities;
Alzheimer’s Disease – neurodegenerative memory loss
Common symptoms of the different types of viral hepatitis include:
Have had symptoms for under 48 hours. Antivirals are less likely to work if you start them after two days of symptoms. The virus has already made more copies of itself and your body has started to fight it off with its own antibodies.
Shortness of Breath:
There are several common blood pressure medicines:
Think of it like a shipping department that can’t keep up with getting all the shipments where they need to go. The shipping department is always running behind and things pile up. When things pile up, they cause issues.
Certain times of the day or night.
You can be contagious with the flu from a day before your symptoms start to up to a week after. You’re most contagious for three to four days after your symptoms start. People with weakened immune systems and infants may be contagious for longer.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Familial Parkinson’s disease
Colds usually begin to wind down during this stage. You may be free and clear at this point. But some symptoms can persist. Some people develop a nagging cough that can last up to two months after a respiratory infection.
Stool-based tests are non-invasive screening methods used to detect the presence of colorectal cancer or precancerous polyps in the stool. The common type of stool-based tests is the fecal occult blood test (FOBT). FOBT detects hidden blood in the stool, which can be an indicator of colorectal cancer or polyps. It involves collecting a small sample of stool and sending it to a laboratory for analysis. If blood or abnormal findings are detected in the stool, further diagnostic procedures, such as colonoscopy, are usually recommended to confirm the presence of colorectal cancer or polyps.
A secondary treatment option is surgery to implant a device that will deliver a mild electrical current to part of your brain (this is known as deep brain stimulation). There are also some experimental options, such as stem cell-based treatments, but their availability often varies, and many aren’t an option for people with Parkinson’s disease.
Blood in your poop or vomit
Eating smaller meals. Larger meals expand your stomach and put pressure on your LES. Smaller meals digest faster and don’t stimulate your stomach to produce so much acid.
Living With
Aged cheese.
Treatment depends on the size, type, and location of the stone.
Blood pressure.
But most lab tests aren’t necessary unless you don’t respond to treatment for Parkinson’s disease, which can indicate you have another condition.
Infectious gastroenteritis is contagious. When you have an infection in your gastrointestinal system, it infects your poop. Infections can spread from your poop to anyone who comes into contact with it.
Apollo Proton Cancer Centre, Chennai, offers this breakthrough technology with global expertise and personalized care. If you’re considering treatment options, consult with our proton therapy team to see if you're eligible.
such as type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Childhood and adolescent obesity have adverse psychosocial consequences; they affects school performance and quality of life,
Applesauce.
Age-standardized breast cancer mortality in high-income countries dropped by 40% between the 1980s and 2020. Countries that have succeeded in reducing breast cancer mortality have been able to achieve an annual breast cancer mortality reduction of 2–4% per year.
Do strength building exercises 2 or more days each week.
Treatments for Gastric (Stomach) Cancer
adopting a healthy balanced diet, including at least five servings of fruit and vegetables daily and reducing intake of salt, saturated fats, and sugars;
There are two main types:
Prevention
Migraines are disruptive. They can interfere with your daily routine and affect your ability to meet personal and social obligations. Treatment is available to help you manage migraines.
Although you can’t change some risk factors like age, family history or race, you can change your lifestyle to give yourself the best chance of preventing heart failure. Things you can do include:
How is GERD diagnosed?
Diagnostic Tests:
Children may require hospitalization if they are younger than 2 months of age or if they are lethargic, having a high fever and experiencing breathing difficulties. If the child appears dehydrated, it is also a sign to get them hospitalized.
Fatigue.
How is a migraine treated?
In contrast, in countries with a low HDI; while only 1 in 27 women is diagnosed with breast cancer in their lifetime, 1 in 48 women will die from it.
depression and anxiety.
PET scan
Side effects: flu-like symptoms, mild fatigue, or nausea
cardiovascular disease (heart disease or stroke)
Clinical trials
Management and Treatment
Not every case of gastroenteritis is preventable. But there’s a lot we can do to reduce our personal risk and prevent common gastrointestinal infections from spreading in our communities. For example:
Struggling to do delicate hand motions (like tie your shoes or type on a keyboard)
drink too much alcohol (1 drink daily max for women, 2 for men)
Enlarged spleen (a small organ inside your rib cage that's part of your immune system)
Vectors can adapt to new environments and climate. The interaction between the dengue virus, the host and the environment is dynamic. Consequently, disease risks may change and shift with climate change in tropical and subtropical areas, in combination with increased urbanization and population movement.
Motor symptoms — which means movement-related symptoms — of Parkinson’s disease include the following:
Arrhythmia.
Get all available COVID-19 vaccines and make sure you have had the latest boosters.
NMDA antagonists
What are the complications of Alzheimer’s disease?
heart problems
Prevention
What are the symptoms of the flu?
age: the risk of developing colorectal cancer increases with age, with most cases occurring in individuals over 50 years old;
How is congestive heart failure diagnosed?
Medications for the treatment of medical conditions that can cause heart failure or make it worse, such as atrial fibrillation, high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity, coronary artery disease, chronic lung disease, high cholesterol and kidney disease.
Outlook / Prognosis
An injection under your skin (subcutaneous).
About 537 million adults across the world have diabetes. Experts predict this number will rise to 643 million by 2030 and 783 million by 2045.
It is important to seek medical care early to avoid serious health effects. Treatments depend on the person’s medical history and the stage of the disease.
Symptoms and Causes
Your provider will talk to you and your loved ones. They’ll ask you questions to understand your health and daily routine. Tell your provider if you know you have any risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease.
Know you’ve had close contact with someone who has viral hepatitis
Symptoms and Causes
Medical history
Type 2 diabetes: With this type, your body doesn’t make enough insulin and/or your body’s cells don’t respond normally to the insulin (insulin resistance). This is the most common type of diabetes. It mainly affects adults, but children can have it as well.
Cardiovascular disease
obesity is weight-for-height greater than 3 standard deviations above the WHO Child Growth Standards median.
Previous infection with DENV increases the risk of an individual developing severe dengue.
CT Scan (Computed Tomography): A CT scan provides detailed cross-sectional images of the stomach and surrounding organs, helping doctors determine the extent of the cancer and check for metastasis.
Anti-seizure medications can control seizures in about 60% to 70% of people with epilepsy. Anti-seizure medication treatment is individualized. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved more than 20 anti-seizure medications for treating epilepsy. Your healthcare provider may try one or more medications, doses of medications or a combination of medications to find what works best to control your seizures.
Use NSAIDs carefully. Don’t take more than recommended. If you’ve had ulcers before, you may need to avoid them or take them with another medicine to protect your stomach.
COPD is sometimes called emphysema or chronic bronchitis. Emphysema usually refers to destruction of the tiny air sacs at the end of the airways in the lungs. Chronic bronchitis refers to a chronic cough with the production of phlegm resulting from inflammation in the airways. COPD and asthma share common symptoms (cough, wheeze and difficulty breathing) and people may have both conditions.
Angioplasty involves using a balloon to widen narrowed coronary arteries, and a stent is often placed to keep the artery open.
Possible cardiac resynchronization therapy (biventricular pacemaker).
Helicobacter pylori Infection: The bacterium Helicobacter pylori is one of the leading causes of stomach cancer. This infection can cause chronic inflammation in the stomach lining, leading to ulcers and changes that increase the risk of cancer. Long-term infection with H. pylori is a known risk factor for gastric cancer.
A healthcare provider will diagnose a migraine after a physical exam and neurological exam. They’ll also learn more about your medical history and biological family health history. Your provider may ask you questions to learn more about your symptoms, including:
How well your heart muscle is working.
asthma in childhood; and
Your provider will suggest treatments to slow down how fast you develop dementia. There’s no cure for Alzheimer’s, but treatments may manage symptoms as they happen and slow down the condition’s progression.
Gestational diabetes: This type develops in some people during pregnancy. Gestational diabetes usually goes away after pregnancy. However, if you have gestational diabetes, you’re at a higher risk of developing Type 2 diabetes later in life.
effectively managing comorbid conditions such as diabetes, dyslipidaemia, and atrial fibrillation;
Diuretic (“water pill”) to reduce or relieve symptoms.
Living With
Depending on your symptoms, you may need other tests to confirm a diagnosis. There isn’t a single test to diagnose IBS. Instead, your provider will determine if you have IBS by:
Diagnosis and Tests
Follow a recipe
Helps shrink tumors and slow progression
Men with a family history of prostate cancer
Biopsy: During an endoscopy, the doctor may take small tissue samples (biopsies) from suspicious areas of the stomach lining. These samples are examined under a microscope to determine if cancer cells are present.
Symptoms of diabetes include increased thirst, frequent urination and slow-healing cuts and sores.
For most people, gastroenteritis isn’t serious. But for people with weaker immune systems, it can be. This includes children under 5, adults over 65 and anyone with a lower health status in general.
People with under-treated asthma can suffer sleep disturbance, tiredness during the day, and poor concentration. Asthma sufferers and their families may miss school and work, with financial impact on the family and wider community. If symptoms are severe, people with asthma may need to receive emergency health care and they may be admitted to hospital for treatment and monitoring. In the most severe cases, asthma can lead to death.
immunotherapy.
When surgery isn’t feasible
Keeping yourself in a calm state (meditating).
How common are migraines?
1. Age
Your baby seems to be getting sicker.
irregular heart beat which can lead to a sudden death.
This is the most common type of prostate cancer, accounting for over 95% of cases. It begins in the gland cells of the prostate that produce seminal fluid. Adenocarcinomas typically grow slowly, but some forms may be aggressive.
IV fluids to prevent or correct dehydration and electrolyte imbalances.
Other types of migraines include:
Sore throat. If acid rises into your throat, it can make it sore. It might feel like there’s a lump in your throat, or like it’s hard to swallow. Reflux into your throat often happens at night.
A healthcare provider might recommend taking medications to treat migraines. There are two types of medications available:
Diabetes can lead to acute (sudden and severe) and long-term complications — mainly due to extreme or prolonged high blood sugar levels.
Oral diabetes medications: Oral diabetes medications (taken by mouth) help manage blood sugar levels in people who have diabetes but still produce some insulin — mainly people with Type 2 diabetes and prediabetes. People with gestational diabetes may also need oral medication. There are several different types. Metformin is the most common.
Abnormal heart rhythms, including ventricular fibrillation, can occur after a heart attack and may be life-threatening.
Statins:
Prostate cancer is staged based on how much the cancer has grown within the prostate and whether it has spread to surrounding or distant tissues. This staging helps determine treatment options and prognosis.
Your provider will also give you a complete physical exam and neurological exam. They’ll rule out other conditions that cause similar memory issues and other symptoms.
Living with IBS can be challenging because symptoms come and go throughout your life. Treatment often involves trial and error. But the good news is that nearly everyone with IBS can find a treatment that helps them over time.
Currently, one vaccine (QDenga) is available and licensed in some countries. However, it is recommended only for those aged 6–16 years in high transmission settings. Several additional vaccines are under evaluation.
depression
Clean toys regularly and avoid sharing toys that babies place in their mouths.
Take medicines as prescribed by your health care professional.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa can cause pneumonia in individuals with decreased lung function like cystic fibrosis, individuals with low immunity and hospitalized individuals.
Surgery
Trigger uncontrolled cell division
Has ear or stomach pain.
Stage C treatment
Prevention
Medical Treatments:
H2 blockers to lower stomach acid
Metastatic prostate cancer is not typically curable but can be managed with appropriate therapies to extend life and improve quality of life.
Nausea and vomiting
Apollo Hospitals is home to Asia’s first and only Proton Therapy Centre, Apollo Proton Cancer Centre, Chennai.
The incidence of both non-melanoma and melanoma skin cancers has been increasing over the past decades. Currently, between 2 and 3 million non-melanoma skin cancers and 132,000 melanoma skin cancers occur globally each year. One in every three cancers diagnosed is a skin cancer and, according to Skin Cancer Foundation Statistics, one in every five Americans will develop skin cancer in their lifetime.
drinking too much alcohol
Prevention
Pulsing.
Outlook / Prognosis
neuropsychological and cognitive therapy to support cognitive function, memory, and emotional well-being; and
Thyroid disease.
Medications to firm stools (anti-diarrheals).
Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting (CABG):
Stool test: To check for an infection or signs of inflammation in your bowel caused by a digestive condition.
Pneumonia in pregnancy
Treatment and care
Biofeedback.
a) Early stage disease. The primary treatment for early stage colorectal cancer (i.e. tumour limited to the bowel or local lymph nodes, with no metastatic dissemination to distant organs) is surgical removal of the tumour and nearby lymph nodes. The specific surgical procedure depends on the location of the tumour. It may involve a colectomy (removal of a portion of the colon) or a proctectomy (removal of the rectum). In some cases, a temporary or permanent colostomy or ileostomy may be needed to create an opening for waste elimination. Adjuvant therapy refers to additional treatment given after surgery to lower the risk of cancer recurrence. In early-stage colorectal cancer, adjuvant chemotherapy may be recommended to kill any remaining cancer cells that cannot be seen or removed during surgery. Adjuvant chemotherapy is typically recommended for patients with a higher risk of recurrence, such as those with lymph node involvement or certain tumour characteristics. Sometimes chemotherapy may be given before surgery (neoadjuvant chemotherapy) to shrink the tumour. Radiation therapy can be associated in tumours of the last segment of the intestine (rectum) to increase the chance of reduce the size of the tumour.
Ear infections.
abnormal or bloody fluid from the nipple.
Dull.
steroids (such as beclometasone) that reduce inflammation in the air passages, which improves asthma symptoms and reduces the risk of severe asthma attacks and death.
If you have high blood pressure, your doctor may recommend one or more medicines. Your recommended blood pressure goal may depend on what other health conditions you have.
Pneumonia can occur in anyone but the following individuals are at highest risk.
Regular blood sugar monitoring.
A balanced, plant-rich diet may help lower risk.
Body aches.
If your symptoms get worse and/or your fever returns, make a trip to a healthcare provider. You may have developed another infection or a complication, such as bronchitis, sinusitis or pneumonia.
What causes the flu?
The treatment for myocardial infarction aims to restore blood flow to the heart, relieve pain, and prevent complications. Treatment options may include medications, surgical interventions, and lifestyle changes.
Lifestyle changes and effective management of high blood pressure can significantly reduce the risk of stroke.
Patient History: The doctor will ask about the symptoms, risk factors, and any family history of heart disease.
rifampicin;
Types of gastroenteritis
Yes, the flu is contagious (it spreads from person to person). For every person infected, they spread the flu to one to two more people.
Hormonal imbalances: During pregnancy, the placenta releases hormones that cause insulin resistance. You may develop gestational diabetes if your pancreas can’t produce enough insulin to overcome the insulin resistance. Other hormone-related conditions like acromegaly and Cushing syndrome can also cause Type 2 diabetes.
Calicivirus.
Boosts the body’s immune system to fight cancer.
IBS triggers
Symptoms lasting more than 10 days or getting worse.
Strop trusting themselves or loved ones
IBS most often occurs in people in their late teens to early 40s. Women are up to twice as likely to get diagnosed with IBS. Other risk factors include:
b. Radiation Therapy
When should I see a healthcare provider for the common cold?
Medications. Certain medications can have a relaxing effect on your LES, including:
High fever.
Get vaccinated against Helicobacter pylori if recommended	Don't delay seeking medical attention for symptoms
chest pain, also called angina;
Yes. Colds spread easily from person to person. For you to become infected, the virus has to get to one of your mucous membranes — the moist lining of your nostrils, eyes or mouth. That happens when you touch a surface or breathe moist air that contains the cold virus.
decreased appetite
Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) – linked to obesity and metabolic syndrome
Under normal circumstances, your brain uses chemicals known as neurotransmitters to control how your brain cells (neurons) communicate with each other. When you have Parkinson’s disease, you don’t have enough dopamine, one of the most important neurotransmitters.
9. Palliative Care for Advanced Prostate Cancer
Your brain has billions of nerve cells called neurons. Your neurons let you think, learn, remember and plan. Amyloid protein sticks together in your brain cells, forming clumps called plaques. Tau proteins twist together in fiber-like strands called tangles. The plaques and tangles prevent neurons from working as they should. They block neurons’ ability to send electrical and chemical signals back and forth.
Cardiomyopathy (genetic or viral).
Runny eyes and nose.
Certain conditions can increase a person’s risk for TB disease:
Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease caused by bacteria that most often affects the lungs. It spreads through the air when people with TB cough, sneeze or spit.
Resolution – The infection is being cleared by immune cells. A productive cough aids in the ejection of any remaining liquid from the lungs.
What are the symptoms of IBS?
Humidifier or vaporizer: Moisten the air in your baby’s room with a humidifier or vaporizer. The clean, cool mist will help moisten the air and decrease the drying of your baby’s nasal passages and throat. Clean and dry the humidifier thoroughly before using it to get rid of bacteria or mold that may have collected in the device. Ensure you have the appropriate filter, and check if it needs to be replaced. Don’t use hot water vaporizers because of the risk of burns.
Random blood glucose test: “Random” means that you can get this test at any time, regardless of if you’ve fasted.
Can I become immune to the antibiotics used to treat a UTI?
Specific foods (caffeine is a common trigger).
Taking medications.
Loss of bowel or bladder control (you peed or pooped during the seizure).
Changes to your sleep.
Viral infection.
Treatment for pneumonia varies depending on the type and severity of the infection. Various medications for pneumonia include:
Haemophilus influenza is an infectious disease caused by the bacteria Haemophilus influenza
Urge incontinence.
Clinical Trials
Wheezing or hoarseness.
The treatment of prostate cancer depends on multiple factors, including the stage of the disease, Gleason score, PSA levels, patient’s age, overall health, and whether the cancer is localized or has spread. Treatment aims to either cure the cancer or manage it effectively to enhance the patient’s quality of life.
Grade 2 (7): Moderately aggressive
Obese men are more likely to develop aggressive and advanced-stage prostate cancer.
a prior stroke
The medications you take.
being physically active
Kidney Stone (Renal Calculi)
Although asthma can be a serious condition, it can be managed with the right treatment. People with symptoms of asthma should speak to a health professional.
This reduces oxygen-rich blood to the heart and can lead to chest pain (angina) or a heart attack.
After sex.
Expectorants: Guaifenesin (Mucinex®) and other expectorants may help thin and loosen mucus.
The exact cause of prostate cancer remains unclear, but it begins when the cells in the prostate gland undergo abnormal changes—typically at the genetic level. These changes cause the cells to grow uncontrollably, live longer than normal, and eventually form a tumor.
Open Radical Prostatectomy
If you have a bleeding ulcer, your provider may treat it during endoscopy by cauterizing the wound or injecting medication. A perforation may need stitches.
Slightly swollen glands.
Hepatitis C is the only viral hepatitis for which there’s a cure.
Stage B treatment
Random blood glucose test	N/A.	N/A.	200 or higher (with classic symptoms of hyperglycemia or hyperglycemic crisis).
Difficulty sleeping.
Living with diabetes can also affect your mental health. People with diabetes are two to three times more likely to have depression than people without diabetes.
Enable cancer cells to invade nearby tissue or spread (metastasize) to distant parts of the body
Fatty Liver Disease Types
Infections are the most common cause of acute gastroenteritis.
What are the types of IBS?
Commonly reported seizure triggers include:
Chemotherapy uses drugs to kill cancer cells or stop their growth. It may be used:
Where you are (even in familiar places like at home)
Researchers don’t know exactly what causes IBS, but they classify it as a neurogastrointestinal (GI) disorder. These conditions, also called disorders of the gut-brain interaction, have to do with problems with how your gut and brain coordinate to help your digestive system work.
Outlook / Prognosis
Chemical gastroenteritis
Parkinson’s disease is very common overall, ranking second among age-related degenerative brain diseases. It’s also the most common motor (movement-related) brain disease. Experts estimate that it affects at least 1% of people over age 60 worldwide.
8. Environmental Exposure
It’s normal for babies to spit up (regurgitate). There might be some acid in it, but usually not enough to really bother them. GERD is a more severe condition that causes distress or complications with feeding.
Antibiotics are medications that fight infections caused by bacteria. Because viruses cause colds, antibiotics don’t work for colds. Sometimes, children may develop complications from bacteria, such as an ear infection or pneumonia. Healthcare providers may prescribe antibiotics to treat these illnesses.
Dysmotility: You may have problems with how your GI muscles contract and move food through your GI tract. The colon (large intestine) muscle tends to contract more in people with IBS. These contractions cause cramps and pain.
Mortality is reduced when breast cancer cases are detected and treated early. There are two components of early detection:
Follow these steps to help prevent tuberculosis infection and spread:
Prostate cancer is a significant health concern for men worldwide, with increasing incidence in both developing and developed countries. While it most commonly affects men over the age of 50, cases are now being reported in younger age groups as well, especially those between 35 and 55 years. Early detection plays a critical role in improving treatment outcomes and preserving quality of life.
Smoking and air pollution are the most common causes of COPD. People with COPD are at higher risk of other health problems.
Possible fluid restriction.
Exposure to a range of environmental allergens and irritants are also thought to increase the risk of asthma, including indoor and outdoor air pollution, house dust mites, moulds, and occupational exposure to chemicals, fumes or dust.
You should also try to pee right before and right after having sex. Sex can introduce bacteria to your urethra, and peeing before and after sex helps flush it out. If you can’t pee, wash the area with warm water.
How do cold symptoms differ from more severe infections in babies and children?
Blood in urine (pink, red, or brown color)
How is epilepsy treated?
Give your baby fluids. For babies 6 months or younger, let them drink breast milk or formula. At 6 months, your baby can also have some water.
Drinking fluids like water or broth to help prevent dehydration.
Cognitive tests
How do I manage symptoms of the flu?
Treatment and care
A cough that lasts more than 3 weeks.
Ice chips.
Genetic Mutations and Cell Abnormalities
Blood Culture: This test is done when it is suspected that infection has spread from lungs to blood or from blood to the lungs.
Left-sided heart failure is the most common cause of right-sided heart failure. When your left ventricle isn’t working correctly, it allows blood to back up. At some point, this backup affects your right ventricle. Other causes include certain lung problems and issues in other organs.
Urine culture. You’ll pee into a special cup, and lab technicians will test your sample to grow and identify any bacteria that are present. Urine cultures are important because they help your provider determine the most appropriate treatment.
Klebsiella pneumonia can cause pneumonia in hospitalized patients on a ventilator. It can also cause pneumonia in alcoholics.
Symptoms
To lower your risk of getting dengue, protect yourself from mosquito bites by using:
workplace hazards like chemicals and asbestos.
Outlook / Prognosis
managing other medical conditions
coughing up blood (haemoptysis)
Changes in diet, exercise, and smoking cessation are crucial for preventing future heart attacks and improving overall heart health.
Transrectal Ultrasound (TRUS)
“Parkinsonism” is an umbrella term that describes Parkinson’s disease and conditions with similar symptoms. It can refer not only to Parkinson’s disease but also to other conditions like multiple system atrophy or corticobasal degeneration.
rash.
Special Considerations:
Nausea and vomiting.
I	Always	Seldom
Symptoms and Causes
Key environmental factors affecting the prevalence of overweight and obesity are those that limit the availability of healthy and
Yes, Alzheimer’s can be hereditary (genetic).
Recovery. Your jaundice symptoms get better as your body overcomes the virus. The recovery stage can last two to four weeks.
Medications can reduce acid, protect your lining and treat infection. They include:
Presence of chronic diseases: Having chronic diseases like asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or heart diseases can make an individual more vulnerable to pneumonia.
Back to video
The most common and effective treatment for Parkinson’s disease is levodopa. While this medication has greatly improved the treatment of Parkinson’s disease, providers use it cautiously because of how it works. They also commonly prescribe other medications that make levodopa more effective or help with side effects and certain symptoms.
Childhood stress: IBS is more common in people who experienced severe stressors in childhood, including physical, sexual and emotional abuse.
eating a healthy, low-salt diet
Prevent normal cell death
Sudden urge to urinate (urge incontinence)
How is Alzheimer’s disease diagnosed?
implement environmental management and modification practices to stop mosquitoes from accessing egg-laying habitats;
MDR-TB remains a public health crisis. Only about 2 in 5 people with multidrug-resistant TB accessed treatment in 2024.
When did your symptoms start?
A cold is a contagious upper respiratory infection that affects your nose, throat, sinuses and windpipe (trachea). You may have heard that the common cold is a coronavirus. In fact, more than 200 different types of viruses can cause a cold. The most common cold virus is the rhinovirus.
Drooling. Another symptom that happens because of loss of facial muscle control.
Prevention of lung cancer include primary and secondary prevention measures. Primary prevention aims to prevent the initial occurrence of a disease through risk reduction and promoting healthy behaviour. In public health, these preventive measures include smoking cessation, promoting smoke-free environments, implementing tobacco control policies, addressing occupational hazards, and reducing air pollution levels.
An aura is a phase of the migraine before head pain begins.
improving indoor and outdoor air quality.
Asthma is more likely if other family members also have asthma – particularly a close relative, such as a parent or sibling.
While some risk factors for myocardial infarction cannot be controlled (e.g., age and genetics), many lifestyle changes can help reduce the risk of developing heart disease:
What is irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)?
What is acid reflux?
Bacterial pneumonia
practice exclusive breastfeeding in the first 6 months after birth and continued breastfeeding until 24 months or beyond;
Symptoms and Causes
Smoking Cessation:
Plecanatide (Trulance®).
2. Rare Types of Prostate Cancer
If you have symptoms of a urinary tract infection, talk to a healthcare provider. They’ll ask questions about your symptoms, review your medical history and conduct a physical examination. They can also order tests to help confirm a diagnosis.
Coronary artery disease (CAD) happens when the arteries supplying blood to the heart become narrow or blocked due to plaque (cholesterol) buildup.
Make plans
The most common symptoms of COPD are difficulty breathing, chronic cough (sometimes with phlegm) and feeling tired.
change in size, shape or appearance of the breast
Does having IBS increase my risk of developing serious gastrointestinal problems?
Blood pressure is written as two numbers. The first (systolic) number represents the pressure in blood vessels when the heart contracts or beats. The second (diastolic) number represents the pressure in the vessels when the heart rests between beats.
Management and Treatment
Managing your stress.
Applying heat packs or hot water bottles can help with aching muscles.
What tests will be done to diagnose the common cold?
Travel abroad, especially in less developed regions.
persistent vomiting
severe abdominal pain
A family history of breast or ovarian cancer may also increase your risk, especially with known BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations or Lynch syndrome.
Smoking: Smoking is a well-established risk factor for many cancers, including gastric cancer. The chemicals in tobacco can damage the stomach lining, leading to an increased risk of cancer development.
Do you notice a change in how often you have a bowel movement?
Brain conditions and brain vessel abnormalities. Brain health issues that can cause epilepsy include brain tumors, strokes, dementia and abnormal blood vessels, such as arteriovenous malformations.
The risk increases further if multiple relatives are affected or if they were diagnosed at a young age.
PSA blood tests
Your LES is a circular muscle that opens when you swallow and then closes again to keep substances in your stomach. It also opens a little to let gas bubbles out when you’re burping or have hiccups.
Streptococcus agalactiae (Group B strep) is a bacteria seen in the female vagina. They can be passed from a pregnant woman to her baby during childbirth and cause severe infections in the newborns. They can also cause infections in the elderly who have diabetes or neurological disease.
Is there any way to estimate how quickly Alzheimer’s will progress?
Antibiotics: These medicines work on the bacteria. Antibiotics are prescribed by the doctor based on the type of bacteria causing pneumonia. If the symptoms fail to ease, replacement of antibiotics is done.
Gastroparesis.
Adenosine blockers. Medications that block how certain cells use adenosine (a molecule used in various forms throughout your body) can have a supportive effect when used alongside levodopa.
Loss of appetite
The most common symptom of a heart attack is chest pain or discomfort. This may feel like pressure, tightness, or a heavy weight on the chest. The pain may radiate to the arms, back, neck, jaw, or stomach.
The four main aspects of managing diabetes include:
Then, take steps to avoid activities that put you at risk. You may not be able to avoid some situations. Talk to a healthcare provider if there’s a chance you have viral hepatitis.
Non-Hispanic Black people, non-Hispanic American Indians, Alaska Native people and Hispanic or Latino people have the highest rates of severe illness from the flu compared to non-Hispanic White people and non-Hispanic Asian people.
pale and cold skin
bleeding gums or nose
Heartburn
Early access to a multidisciplinary team that includes oncologists, radiologists, pathologists, dieticians/nutritionists, physical therapists, social workers, mental health, palliative care and rehabilitation teams both during and after completion of treatment helps improve outcomes. It also helps patients maintain or restore their functioning, independence and participation in meaningful life roles and community activities more quickly than might otherwise be the case.
What causes peptic ulcer disease?
Symptoms will get noticeably worse over time (a progressive decline). See a healthcare provider right away if you or a loved one have any dementia-like symptoms.
Clinical Evaluation:
Diagnosis
Cirrhosis
Prevention
Quit smoking.
Sleep issues such as not sleeping well, not getting enough sleep, being overtired, disrupted sleep and sleep disorders like sleep apnea.
Lung Cancer – increasing due to smoking & pollution
b) Advanced disease: The treatment for metastatic stage lung cancer, where the cancer has spread to distant organs or lymph nodes, is based on various factors, including the patient's overall health, the extent and location of metastases, histology, genetic profile, and individual preferences. The primary goal is to prolong survival, alleviate symptoms, and improve quality of life. Systemic therapies, such as chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy, play a crucial role in the treatment of metastatic lung cancer.
Experts believe idiopathic Parkinson’s disease happens because of problems with how your body uses a protein called α-synuclein (alpha sy-nu-clee-in). Proteins are chemical molecules that have a very specific shape. When some proteins don’t have the correct shape — a problem known as protein misfolding — your body can’t use them and can’t break them down.
There are several steps you can take to prevent a cold, including:
High, intermittent exposure to solar UV appears to be a significant risk factor for the development of malignant melanoma.
If you have TB, practice good hygiene when coughing, including avoiding contact with other people and wearing a mask, covering your mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing, and disposing of sputum and used tissues properly.
Esophageal ulcers: Chronic acid reflux can erode the lining of your esophagus, which doesn’t have the same protection as your stomach.
Tooth decay, cavities and other dental issues
Have a weakened immune system (from HIV/AIDS, cancer or immunosuppressive medications).
How can I prevent the flu?
Non-melanoma skin cancers are most frequent on parts of the body that are commonly exposed to the sun such as ears, face, neck and forearms. This implies that long-term, repeated UV radiation exposure is a major causal factor.
Diets high in red meat, processed meats, and high-fat dairy products, with low intake of fruits and vegetables, are linked to increased risk.
How common is the flu?
Excessive fussiness.
Having a family history of congestive heart failure.
If you suspect you or someone else is experiencing Stomach cancer, it is crucial to seek immediate medical attention by calling emergency services or consult with a Cancer Specialist.
In 2022, 2.5 billion adults aged 18 years and older were overweight, including over 890 million adults who were living with obesity (1).
If you know that you or someone in your care has a weaker immune system, take special care to avoid dehydration and exhaustion from gastroenteritis. Seek healthcare if symptoms don’t improve soon.
Rehabilitation is a critical component of stroke care and recovery. It aims to help individuals regain functional abilities, improve quality of life, and restore independence to the greatest extent possible. Stroke rehabilitation should begin as soon as the person is medically stable – ideally within the first few days after the stroke.
Saline and suction: About 15 minutes before a feeding, use over-the-counter saline (salt water) drops to loosen up the mucus in your baby’s nostrils. Suction out the liquid and mucus a few minutes later with a rubber bulb or oral suction device. This will clear the mucus out of your baby’s nose and allow them to breathe and suck at the same time.
Cough Medicine: Severe coughing can be troublesome for patients. Cough medication reduces cough and helps the patient rest. A cough is sometimes required to remove fluid from the lungs. in such cases, the low dose of cough medicine might be reduced.
Atherosclerosis.
The body mass index is a surrogate marker of fatness and additional measurements, such as the waist circumference, can help the diagnosis of obesity.
Fatigue.
Worsening of other health conditions.
Management and Treatment
The food industry can play a significant role in promoting healthy diets by:
Surgical removal of the prostate gland and sometimes surrounding tissue or lymph nodes. Options include:
Backwash. You might notice acid, food or liquids backwashing from your stomach into your throat after eating. This is also called regurgitation. You might notice the sour taste of the acid.
Are pregnant.
Head pain gradually gets more intense. It can affect one side of your head or both. It can occur with other symptoms like:
Fever of 101 to 102 degrees Fahrenheit (38.3 to 38.9 degrees Celsius).
restlessness
Congestive heart failure symptoms include:
People with asthma may need to use their inhaler every day. Their treatment will depend on the frequency of symptoms and the types of inhalers available.
Palliative care: To relieve symptoms, such as pain or obstruction, caused by advanced cancer.
Are migraines hereditary?
To avoid spreading the flu to others, you shouldn’t go back to work or school until it’s been at least 24 hours since you’ve had a fever (without taking fever-reducing medications). Your employer or school may have different requirements for returning.
Blood in your vomit
Viral pneumonia
Chest pain.
balance – sudden dizziness, loss of balance or coordination
Swelling or fluid buildup in the abdomen (ascites): Bloating or distention of the abdomen due to fluid accumulation.
tendency to burn rather than suntan
What is the major cause of a urinary tract infection?
ensuring that healthy and nutritious choices are available and affordable to all consumers;
A stress test measures how well the heart performs during physical activity. It can help identify areas of the heart that are not receiving enough blood due to blocked arteries.
Your symptoms.
Are These Symptoms Definitive for Prostate Cancer?
For most people, the goal is to have a blood pressure less than 140/90.
Influenza (Flu)
Common infectious organisms are usually difficult to be identified, and therefore the medical history or the patient, identification of common agents in the community and the patient’s clinical presentation are taken into consideration. In cases where symptoms do not resolve after a primary treatment, additional testing may be performed to diagnose and identify less common causes of pneumonia.
Treatment
Most colds go away on their own within seven to 10 days. Most people recover quickly and the common cold doesn’t lead to anything more serious.
Early symptoms of the common cold include sore throat, runny nose and coughing.
older age
Add supplemental fiber to your diet. Another option is to try fiber supplements, like Metamucil® or Citrucel®.
Depression.
Dehydration or low water intake
shortness of breath
Flu can last from a few days to two weeks. Symptoms like fever and body aches can come on suddenly but usually go away faster than other symptoms. A cough or runny nose can last longer.
Measles
Stroke can lead to a wide range of complications, including serious effects on the brain, heart and other parts of the body.
Esophageal stricture. Your esophagus may also develop scar tissue to protect it from chronic inflammation and injury. Scar tissue can cause your esophagus to narrow. This is called stricture. Esophageal strictures can make it hard to swallow, which can make it hard to eat and drink.
Epilepsy – recurrent seizures
Treatments for colorectal cancer are based on the type and progression of the cancer and the person’s medical history. Early detection of colorectal cancer can lead to better treatments and outcomes.
The cells in your brain send messages to and receive messages from all areas of your body. These messages are transmitted via a continuous electrical impulse that travels from cell to cell. Epilepsy disrupts this rhythmic electrical impulse pattern. Instead, there are bursts of electrical energy — like an unpredictable lightning storm — between cells in one or more areas of your brain. This electrical disruption causes changes in your awareness (including loss of consciousness), sensations, emotions and muscle movements.
Get plenty of physical activity. Exercise and physical activities increase blood flow and oxygen to your brain, which may improve your brain cell health. You don’t have to be a high-level athlete to stay active. Walking, gardening, riding a bike or any hobby that makes you move your body can be great ways to stay active.
Runny nose (the discharge may start clear; later, it becomes thicker and may be gray, yellow or green).
Children under 5 years of age
Calcium channel blockers including amlodipine and felodipine relax blood vessels.
Based on the geographical location of the individual, the type of bacteria causing the infection could vary. In such cases, travelers and tourists who migrate from certain countries may be exposed to bacteria types that are less common in their own geographical location. In some cases, a person may be exposed and become vulnerable to a rare type of bacterial pneumonia due to his weakened immune system or an underlying health condition.
Diagnosis and Tests
Neurological issues if the spine is involved
Cytoprotective agents to coat and protect your lining
RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) is a virus that causes respiratory (RSV)
Severe muscle pain or weakness.
Excessive crankiness or sleepiness.
Supportive care is important for people with lung cancer. It aims to manage symptoms, provide pain relief, and give emotional support. It can help to increase quality of life for people with lung cancer and their families.
What are the phases of a migraine?
To be effective, medications need to be taken daily for 4–6 months. It is dangerous to stop the medications early or without medical advice as it can prompt TB bacteria in the body to become resistant to the antibiotics.
Numbness, weakness, or even paralysis in the lower limbs (if cancer spreads to the spine)
Complications of Myocardial Infarction
Treatments for breast cancer are more effective and are better tolerated when started early and taken to completion. The effectiveness of breast cancer therapies depends on completing the full course of treatment. Partial treatment is less likely to lead to a positive outcome.
Changes in your senses — how things taste, smell or sound.
People with very high blood pressure (usually 180/120 or higher) can experience symptoms including:
aphasia or other speech disorders
Lifestyle changes can help lower high blood pressure. These include:
Mosquitoes can become infected by people who are viremic with DENV. This can be someone who has a symptomatic dengue infection, someone who is yet to have a symptomatic infection (those who are pre-symptomatic), and also someone who shows no signs of illness (those who are asymptomatic).
For stage 4 or metastatic prostate cancer, the focus shifts to:
Cholesterol.
Your age
Pleural effusion – It is a type of pleural effusion that occurs when If you don’t treat your pneumonia, you could develop pleural effusion, which is fluid around your lungs in your pleura. Pleurae are thin membranes that line the inside of your rib cage and the outside of your lungs. If the fluid becomes infectious, it must be evacuated.
What is the prognosis after treatment for peptic ulcer disease?
Migraine with aura (classic migraine).
Regular exercise.
When Should You Get Screened?
Hormone therapy (HT) medications for menopause.
Microorganisms — usually bacteria — cause urinary tract infections. They typically enter through your urethra and may infect your bladder. The infection can also travel up from your bladder through your ureters and eventually infect your kidneys.
Stages C and D with preserved EF
Surgery may improve symptoms for some people with severe COPD.
Cryptosporidiosis.
Family history of breast cancer increases the risk of breast cancer, but most women diagnosed with breast cancer do not have a known family history of the disease. However, lack of a known family history does not necessarily mean that a woman is at reduced risk.
What are the complications of congestive heart failure?
For acid to get into your esophagus, it needs to get past the valve at the bottom of your esophagus that usually keeps things from coming back up. This valve is called your lower esophageal sphincter (LES).
provide counselling on healthy diet and lifestyles;
Age is the strongest risk factor. Prostate cancer is rare in men under 50 but becomes increasingly common as men age.
Certain medical conditions (e.g., gout, urinary tract infections)
Viral hepatitis is a common condition that can have life-threatening consequences. You can prevent some viral hepatitis infections by receiving vaccinations.
Children aged between 5–19 years
E. coli cause more than 90% of bladder infections. E. coli typically exist in your lower intestines (large intestine).
Over-the-counter medications. Antacids and alginates are good to have on hand, especially if you know you’re eating a rich or acidic meal that might trigger more stomach acid.
Imaging tests like a CT scan or GI X-ray can spot large ulcers. Many people get a final diagnosis from an upper endoscopy. This also allows your provider to test for H. pylori directly.
Reasoning
Loss of appetite or upset stomach (nausea).
Most people feel better within a few days after starting antibiotics to treat a UTI.
Gepants (rimegepant and ubrogepant).
TB and HIV
Chills.
Stage D and reduced EF (ejection fraction)
Headache.
What is the flu (influenza)?
post-stroke epilepsy
Finally, the rise in obesity rates in low-and middle-income countries, including among lower socio-economic groups, is fast globalizing a problem that was once associated only with high-income countries.
Coronary artery disease.
While infections are not a direct cause of myocardial infarction, certain viral or bacterial infections can lead to inflammation in the coronary arteries, increasing the risk of plaque rupture. Inflammatory conditions like myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) can also contribute to heart attack risk, although they are less common.
Breast cancer can have combinations of symptoms, especially when it is more advanced. Symptoms of breast cancer can include:
Stay hydrated by drinking an adequate amount of water	Limit alcohol consumption, or avoid it altogether
Side effects of treatment
In 2024, more cases of dengue were recorded than ever before in a 12-month period, affecting over 100 countries on all continents. During 2024, ongoing transmission, combined with an unexpected spike in dengue cases, resulted in a historic high of over 14.6 million cases and more than 12 000 dengue-related deaths reported. The Region of the Americas contributed a significant proportion of the global burden, with over 13 million cases reported to WHO.
Types of Kidney Stones
Cancers that express the estrogen receptor (ER) and/or progesterone receptor (PR) are likely to respond to endocrine (hormone) therapies such as tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors. These medicines are taken orally for 5–10 years and reduce the chance of recurrence of these “hormone-positive” cancers by nearly half. Endocrine therapies can cause symptoms of menopause but are generally well tolerated.
Taking cough suppressants (antitussives) like dextromethorphan can help calm a nagging cough.
Clinical trials offer opportunities to access novel treatments or experimental therapies for patients. Participation in clinical trials helps advance medical knowledge and potentially offers new treatment options.
You might want to ask your provider a few questions, like:
Pediatricians recommend the flu (influenza) vaccine each year for babies who are at least 6 months old. The shot protects against the flu but not against other respiratory viruses. The COVID-19 immunization is available as well for infants starting at 6 months of age.
Symptoms
The outlook for urinary tract infections is good. Most UTIs usually respond very well to treatment. A UTI can be annoying or uncomfortable before you start treatment. However, once a healthcare provider identifies the bacteria and prescribes the appropriate antibiotic, your symptoms should improve quickly.
Work to achieve a weight that’s healthy for you.
face – facial droop
Stomach Cancer
Anemia: Symptoms like pale skin, dizziness, or shortness of breath due to low red blood cell count from internal bleeding.
Sweets.
Diagnosis
Malignant melanoma, although far less prevalent than non-melanoma skin cancers, is the major cause of death from skin cancer and is more likely to be reported and accurately diagnosed than non-melanoma skin cancers. Since the early 1970s, malignant melanoma incidence has increased significantly, for example an average 4 per cent every year in the United States. A large number of studies indicate that the risk of malignant melanoma correlates with genetic and personal characteristics, and a person’s UV exposure behaviour. The following is a summary of the main human risk factors:
How soon after treatment will I feel better, and how long will it take to recover?
People living with COPD must be given information about their condition, treatment and self-care to help them to stay as active and healthy as possible.
Treatments from Stages A and B.
Faces or names
You can also get a peptic ulcer in your:
Smoking tobacco (including cigarettes, cigars, and pipes) is the primary risk factor for lung cancer but it can also affect non-smokers. Other risk factors include exposure to secondhand smoke, occupational hazards (such as asbestos, radon and certain chemicals), air pollution, hereditary cancer syndromes, and previous chronic lung diseases.
Doxycycline.
Diagnosis and Tests
Communicate or talk less than you used to
Obesity. Obesity increases the pressure and volume in your abdomen, which affects your LES similarly to how pregnancy does. Obesity also tends to last longer than pregnancy, which can weaken the muscles more permanently. It’s a common contributing factor to developing a hiatal hernia. Since fat tissue secretes estrogen, having more of it also raises your estrogen levels.
Grade 1 (≤6): Well-differentiated, less aggressive
Your provider diagnoses the flu by listening to your symptoms and testing a sample of mucus from your nose. They’ll put a long stick with a soft tip (swab) in your nose to test for influenza. Results may take a few minutes or your provider may send the sample to a lab, where you’ll get results in a day or two.
Autoimmune disease: Type 1 diabetes and LADA happen when your immune system attacks the insulin-producing cells in your pancreas.
Seek medical attention if you have symptoms like prolonged cough, fever and unexplained weight loss as early treatment for TB can help stop the spread of disease and improve your chances of recovery.
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
2. Family History & Genetics
A stroke is a medical emergency that occurs when blood flow to the brain is interrupted, either due to a blockage or bleeding. This lack of blood flow can lead to brain cell death and serious complications. Strokes can be fatal and need immediate treatment.
Seek professional advice for a well-balanced diet plan	Don't ignore family history; discuss it with your doctor
How long does a common cold last?
Fever in an infant 2 months or younger.
Aspergillosis.
Exposure to Workplace Chemicals: Certain occupations expose individuals to chemicals that may increase the risk of gastric cancer. For example, workers in industries such as rubber, coal, and metal may be at higher risk due to exposure to toxic substances.
It’s the most common disease that gastroenterologists (experts in GI diseases) diagnose.
Pain when you pee (dysuria).
Hepatitis C. Chronic hepatitis C has five stages that cause fibrosis (scar tissue).
Drinking extra fluids — especially water — each day can help flush out bacteria from your urinary tract. Healthcare providers recommend drinking six to eight glasses of water daily.
Patients with high-risk or recurrent disease
Changing daily activities can help, too. Your provider may recommend that you:
Pulmonary hypertension.
Theophylline, a common asthma medication.
TB preventive treatment (or TPT) prevents infection from becoming disease. If prescribed TPT, complete the full course.
Involves freezing prostate tissue using liquid nitrogen to destroy cancer cells. It’s a minimally invasive option suitable for:
Pain in your flank, abdomen, pelvic area or lower back.
Based on the symptoms displayed by the person and his health status, various laboratory tests may be performed for accurate diagnosis. Commonly prescribed diagnostic tests that can be done in a laboratory include:
Fatigue.
Family History and Genetics: A family history of gastric cancer increases an individual's risk. Inherited genetic mutations can play a role in predisposing individuals to stomach cancer. Conditions such as hereditary diffuse gastric cancer syndrome, caused by mutations in the CDH1 gene, can significantly increase the risk.
Bright lights.
Talk to your provider about genetic testing if you’re worried about Alzheimer’s running in your biological family. They can screen you for the genes or genetic changes that may increase your risk of AD.
Treatment includes:
After feeding on a DENV-infected person, the virus replicates in the mosquito midgut before disseminating to secondary tissues, including the salivary glands. The time it takes from ingesting the virus to actual transmission to a new host is termed the extrinsic incubation period (EIP). The EIP takes about 8–12 days when the ambient temperature is 25–28°C. Variations in the EIP are not only influenced by ambient temperature but also by several other factors – such as the magnitude of daily temperature fluctuations, the virus genotype, and the initial viral concentration – which can also alter the time it takes for a mosquito to transmit the virus. Once infectious, a mosquito can transmit the virus for the rest of its life.
radiation therapy to reduce recurrence risk in the breast and surrounding tissues; and
Anemia.
Heart failure
When you’re having frequent diarrhea or vomiting, you’re losing a lot of fluids and electrolytes. If you can't replace them fast enough, you could become dehydrated and develop electrolyte imbalances.
What are the possible complications of acute gastroenteritis?
Acid Reflux / GERD – heartburn and digestive discomfort
Almost half of the children under 5 years who were overweight or living with obesity in 2024 lived in Asia.
monitor other NCD risk factors (blood glucose, lipids and blood pressure) and assess the presence of comorbidities and disability, including mental health disorders.
Birth defects. Congenital defects like esophageal atresia and hernias can affect your LES.
Experts classify Alzheimer’s disease with stages. These stages can refer to how close you are to having dementia, the Alzheimer’s severity or how quickly it developed.
Stay socially connected. Regularly talk with your loved ones or people in your community. Joining group activities, such as religious services, exercise classes, book clubs or community volunteer work can all help keep your brain engaged.
Arrhythmias:
Irritability.
Part 2: Motor aspects of experiences of daily living. This section covers the effects on movement-related tasks and abilities. It includes your ability to speak, eat, chew and swallow, dress and bathe yourself if you have tremors, and more.
Side effects: fatigue, hair loss, nausea, appetite loss
Small vomiting episodes.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia. Alzheimer’s is pronounced “alz-HAI-mers.” It’s a neurodegenerative disease that affects your brain. This means it damages and destroys cells in your brain over time. Eventually, people with AD lose some of their brain functions, including memory and language.
mosquito nets, ideally sprayed with insect repellent, if sleeping during the day;
Increased thirst (polydipsia) and dry mouth.
Adding dopamine. Medications like levodopa can increase the available levels of dopamine in your brain. This medication is almost always effective, and when it doesn’t work, that’s usually a sign of some other form of parkinsonism rather than Parkinson’s disease. Long-term use of levodopa eventually leads to side effects that make it less effective.
When should I seek care?
many moles
Outlook / Prognosis
Arterial Blood Gases or ABG: This test measures pH and the amount of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood. This is an indication of lung function.
Urinary incontinence.
Health practitioners need to:
Not eating healthy, balanced meals or drinking enough fluids; vitamin and mineral deficiencies, skipping meals.
Do's & Don’t's
It takes a long-term issue to lower these defenses enough for acid to erode the lining. Most cases are due to:
Kidney failure.
Usually, changing the foods you eat and your activity levels improve symptoms with time. You may need some patience as you figure out your triggers and take steps to avoid them. Your symptoms may not completely disappear. But, after a few weeks or months, you should notice a significant improvement in how you feel.
Live or work in a childcare or nursing home.
Stay mentally active. Play board games, read, do crossword puzzles, play a musical instrument or do other hobbies that challenge your brain to use and learn new skills.
Beverages containing alcohol.
a) Early stage disease: The primary treatment for early stage lung cancer (i.e. tumour limited to the lung, with no metastatic dissemination to distant organs or lymph nodes) is surgical removal of the tumour through procedures such as lobectomy, segmentectomy, or wedge resection. Neoadjuvant therapy (chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy before surgery) can help reduce tumour size, making it more manageable for surgical removal. Adjuvant treatment (chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy) is very often recommended after surgery to reduce the risk of cancer recurrence. In cases where surgery is not feasible, radiation therapy or stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) may be used as the primary treatment. Targeted therapy and immunotherapy may also be considered based on specific tumour characteristics. Individualized treatment plans should be discussed with healthcare professionals.
Risk factors
The types of strokes are:
Drink plenty of fluids
Seizure triggers are events or something that happens before the start of your seizure.
iron deficiency anaemia due to chronic bleeding, causing fatigue, weakness and paleness.
Human-to-mosquito transmission can occur up to 2 days before someone shows symptoms of the illness, and up to 2 days after the fever has resolved.
Weather condition changes.
Chronic gastritis
Other diabetes complications include:
Your healthcare provider may test again after treatment to make sure the ulcer has healed and the infection is gone. H. pylori can come back, and ulcers may return if the cause isn’t addressed.
Histamine receptor antagonists (H2 blockers). H2 blockers reduce stomach acid by blocking the chemical that tells your body to produce it (histamine). You can take them more frequently than antacids, but they don’t always work long-term. Your body can adapt to their effects.
Stay informed about your family history: If prostate or breast cancer runs in your family, speak with your doctor about earlier or more frequent screenings.
Being older than 65.
Abdominal pain or cramps, usually related to the urge to poop.
Can you describe the feeling and location of your headache?
Chills.
Seizure type.
Yes, it’s possible to get a UTI from your fingers. Your hands can pick up bacteria and other microorganisms whenever you touch a surface. You can accidentally introduce bacteria to your urethra when you go to the bathroom or during sexual acts, including masturbation or fingering.
Endoscopic Ultrasound (EUS): This procedure combines endoscopy with ultrasound. The endoscope has an ultrasound probe at its tip, which helps assess the tumor’s size and whether it has invaded nearby tissues or lymph nodes.
Men of African descent (who have a higher risk)
arms – weakness in one or both arms
Ischemia
surgery
Stage B
Symptoms of colds in babies may include:
Many low- and middle-income countries face a so-called double burden of malnutrition.
Talk to your provider about living with AD. They’ll help you set realistic goals and expectations. They can also help you and your loved ones decide when hospice care is a good option for you.
Grade 3 (8–10): Poorly differentiated and aggressive
Headache attack symptoms
Choose lean meats and low-fat cooking methods: Cooking meats at high temperatures (such as grilling or barbecuing) can produce carcinogenic substances. Opting for lean cuts of meat and using healthier cooking methods, like baking or steaming, may lower risk.
Echocardiogram.
Several epidemiological studies support a positive association with history of sunburn, particularly sunburn at an early age.
Levodopa is often combined with other medications to keep your body from processing it before it enters your brain. That helps avoid other side effects of dopamine, especially nausea, vomiting and low blood pressure when you stand up (orthostatic hypotension).
Myocardial infarction (MI) is a medical term for a heart attack, which occurs when the blood flow to a part of the heart muscle is blocked or restricted. This blockage prevents oxygen and nutrients from reaching the heart muscle, causing tissue damage or death. The primary cause of MI is the buildup of fatty deposits, known as plaque, in the coronary arteries, a condition called atherosclerosis.
tobacco exposure from active smoking or passive exposure to second-hand smoke;
If myocardial infarction is left untreated or poorly managed, it can lead to severe complications:
Swelling in your ankles, legs and abdomen.
Stress test.
Infection with the human parainfluenza virus (HPIV).
How is it treated, and is there a cure?
Eat raw fish or meat.
Prescription medications for GERD include:
Other possible causes of GERD include:
Nausea and vomiting.
Foods and drinks probably aren’t enough to cause acid reflux alone, but they can contribute to it. Chocolate, coffee, alcohol, mint, garlic and onions may have a relaxing effect on your LES in higher doses.
What are the signs of a urinary tract infection?
Cough.
Symptoms and Causes
Muscle jerks.
What to do during an acid reflux attack?
Symptoms of pneumonia vary based on the age of the affected individual, his or her health condition and the type of microorganism that is causing the infection.
What is the treatment for IBS?
Protein misfolding is common in many other disorders, such as Alzheimer’s disease, Huntington’s disease, multiple forms of amyloidosis and more.
ischaemic stroke: a blood clot blocks a blood vessel in your brain leading to loss of blood flow;
Hypertension(high blood pressure) is when the pressure in your blood vessels is too high (140/90 mmHg or higher). It is common but can be serious if not treated.
Urine tests
emotional and psychological conditions, including depression and anxiety
Ultrasound: In some cases, an ultrasound may be used to detect tumors or fluid buildup in the abdomen.
Can I prevent IBS?
Acute viral hepatitis stages
use acetaminophen (paracetamol) for pain;
cough that does not go away
Researchers categorize IBS based on how your stools (poop) look on the days when you’re having symptom flare-ups. Most people with IBS have normal bowel movements on some days and abnormal ones on others. The abnormal days define the kind of IBS you have.
What Is Fatty Liver Disease?
Stage 2: Active (Days 4 to 7)
A urinary tract infection (UTI) is an infection of your urinary system. This type of infection can involve your:
No, IBS doesn’t put you at higher risk of developing conditions such as colitis, Crohn’s disease or colon cancer.
Using alternative migraine remedies.
In the case of ischaemic stroke, thrombolytic therapy (e.g. tPA) should be carried out as soon as possible, and within hours of symptom onset. An endovascular thrombectomy may be indicated, depending on the severity and location of symptoms.
brain oedema or swelling of the brain
When should my baby see their provider for the common cold?
Age:
tobacco use: associated with approximately two-fifths of all stroke deaths among individuals under the age of 65; and
Gastrointestinal infections are most contagious during the period when you have symptoms, and for two days after. These last two days are when your body is shedding the infection through your poop.
Living With
psychological support and counselling to address depression, anxiety, and emotional adjustment after stroke.
Dark-colored pee
Types of peptic ulcers
TB that doesn’t respond to standard drugs is called drug-resistant TB and requires treatment with different medicines.
Clarification: Is There a Stage 5?
Stage 3	Spread to nearby tissues	Surgery, radiation, hormone therapy
The most common way to get hepatitis C in the U.S. is sharing needles and syringes to inject intravenous drugs. You’re also at risk when getting a tattoo or body piercing with unsterile equipment.
Campylobacter.
Giardiasis.
Blinking less often than usual. This is also a symptom of reduced control of facial muscles.
Artificial sweeteners.
Talk to your healthcare provider before starting any alternative therapies for migraines.
Signs and symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome
Symptoms of acid reflux and GERD may include:
Infectious gastroenteritis is the most common type. It’s caused by an infection in your gastrointestinal tract (your stomach and/or intestines). Viruses, bacteria, fungi or parasites may cause the infection.
Pain in your penis.
Ultrasound. An ultrasound is an imaging test that helps your provider look at your internal organs. An ultrasound is painless and doesn’t require any preparation.
Vomiting.
Have severe symptoms, even if you’ve been sick for longer than 48 hours.
Get the pneumonia vaccine.
Feeling of incomplete bladder emptying
muscle and joint pains
Limit foods that can make you gassy. Foods like beans, brussels sprouts and cabbage are notorious for causing gas, but carbonated sodas and even chewing gum can make you gassy. Reduce these foods to go easier on your gut.
keeping an active lifestyle
In rare instances, cancer cells may enter the urethra or bladder, potentially causing urinary symptoms such as blockage or blood in urine.
Doctors from several disciplines often work together to provide treatment and care of people with colorectal cancer.
Most peptic ulcers heal with medication. But if you have complications (like a bleeding or perforated ulcer), you may need more care. Many issues can be treated during an endoscopy.
Upper endoscopy. An upper endoscopy involves looking inside your esophagus with a camera. The camera is on the end of a thin tube that passes through your mouth while you’re asleep under light sedation.
Diagnosis and Tests
Global impact
Tell your provider about any health conditions you have before starting an antiviral medication.
Studies show that people with diabetes may be able to reduce their risk of complications by consistently keeping their A1c levels below 7%.
Symptoms of GERD in babies (or small children) may include:
Pathologists assess cancer cells under a microscope and assign a score from 2 to 10 based on patterns of cell abnormality:
Prevention
Global estimates reveal striking inequities in the breast cancer burden according to human development. For instance, in countries with a very high Human Development Index (HDI), 1 in 12 women will be diagnosed with breast cancer in their lifetime and 1 in 71 women die of it.
Quitting smoking and drinking. Both tobacco and alcohol weaken your LES. They also affect your stomach, making it more acidic and slowing your digestion time.
Aura symptoms
Common symptoms: Chest pain, shortness of breath, fatigue (or no symptoms).
Symptoms of the flu usually come on quickly, and can include:
Adults
If screening tests suggest the possibility of cancer, further investigations are conducted:
Muscle pains
Crackers.
fair skin
What is a migraine?
From someone nearby coughing, sneezing or talking. Droplets can either get onto your hands or move through the air to get into your nose or mouth. The flu then moves into your lungs.
Your treatment will depend on the type of heart failure you have and, in part, what caused it. Medications and lifestyle changes are part of every heart failure treatment plan. Your healthcare provider will talk to you about the best treatment plan for you.
Cardiac Rehabilitation:
Unmatched Precision – Ideal for tumors close to vital organs
Adults over 65 years of age
Pediatric Population: While myocardial infarction is rare in children, it can occur due to genetic conditions or congenital heart defects.
Treatment for Prostate Cancer
Cystine stones (rare, genetic condition)
Tiredness or feeling run down.
Painful ejaculation
Soup broths.
Stages of Prostate Cancer
WHO recommends the use of rapid diagnostic tests as the initial diagnostic tests in all persons with signs and symptoms of TB.
How often do you have symptoms?
Fractures
Chronic migraine.
While having one or more risk factors does not guarantee that you will develop prostate cancer, certain factors are known to increase your likelihood of getting the disease. Understanding these risk factors can help with early screening and informed decision-making.
Your provider will ask your loved ones if they’ve noticed any symptoms or changes you might not be able to see in yourself. They might ask about your:
Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) – VAP is a type of pneumonia that affects patients who use a ventilator.
What helps acid reflux at home?
Side effects of the anti-seizure drug (if any).
Healthcare providers diagnose diabetes by checking your glucose level in a blood test. Three tests can measure your blood glucose level:
apply appropriate insecticides to water storage outdoor containers.
Urbanization (especially rapid, unplanned urbanization), is associated with dengue transmission through multiple social and environmental factors: population density, human mobility, access to reliable water source, water storage practices, etc.
Obesity
Long-acting bronchodilators take longer to start working but last longer. These are taken daily and can be combined with inhaled steroids.
Use this appointment guide to prepare for your visit and learn how to collaborate with your doctor for more personalized care.
Electrocardiogram (EKG or ECG).
Memantine is a common NMDA antagonist. Your provider may suggest others depending on your health and which stage of Alzheimer’s disease you have.
The primary mode of transmission of the DENV between humans involves mosquito vectors. There is evidence, however, of the possibility of maternal transmission (i.e. from a pregnant mother to her baby). At the same time, vertical transmission rates appear low, with the risk of vertical transmission seemingly linked to the timing of acquiring the dengue infection during pregnancy. When a mother does have a dengue infection when she is pregnant, babies may suffer from pre-term birth, low birthweight and fetal distress.
Say or use the wrong word
Individuals who are infected for the second time are at greater risk of severe dengue. The symptoms of severe dengue often come after the fever has gone away and may include:
How is it diagnosed?
Severe illness or injury
Antiplatelet Drugs:
You’ll need little to no help in the earlier stages and can keep living independently. As the effects worsen, you’ll need medication to limit how the symptoms affect you. Most medications, especially levodopa, are moderately or even very effective once your provider finds the minimum dose you need to treat your symptoms.
Quitting smoking significantly reduces the risk of heart disease and improves overall heart health.
Prior surgery. Surgery in your chest or upper abdomen may have injured your esophagus.
Non-Pharmacological Treatments:
Prostate cancer often begins with changes in the gland’s cells that may go unnoticed for years. Early prostate cancer usually does not present symptoms, which makes routine screening essential for timely detection.
IBS with diarrhea (IBS-D): Most of your poop is loose and watery.
Ribs showing with each breath.
Burning sensation while urinating
Caffeinated beverages.
These symptoms are not exclusive to prostate cancer and may also occur with non-cancerous prostate conditions, but they warrant evaluation by a healthcare provider.
A healthcare provider can help you identify what triggers your migraines. They may ask you to keep a migraine journal or diary. A migraine journal can help you keep track of when a migraine happened, how you felt and how long it lasted. You can also add details about the foods you ate or the activities you participated in to learn more about any possible triggers.
Increased drooling because of sore throat and difficulty swallowing.
Abdominal pain and cramping.
Radiotherapy plays a very important role in treating breast cancer. With early-stage breast cancers, radiation can prevent a woman having to undergo a mastectomy. With later stage cancers, radiotherapy can reduce cancer recurrence risk even when a mastectomy has been performed.
Don’t:
What are Alzheimer’s disease symptoms?
Before turning 2 years old, a baby can get as many as eight to 10 colds a year. By the time you become an adult, you’ve had many colds. It’s easier for your immune system to identify and attack similar viruses.
window screens;
Diabetes-related foot conditions.
Medications like clopidogrel or ticagrelor are used to prevent blood clots from forming in the coronary arteries after a heart attack.
Unstable posture or walking gait. The slowed movements and stiffness of Parkinson’s disease cause a hunched over or stooped stance. This usually appears as the disease gets worse. It’s visible when a person walks because they’ll use shorter, shuffling strides and move their arms less. Turning while walking may take several steps.
Causes
Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease
Avoid second-hand smoke or smoke from indoor cooking fires.
How long does the flu last?
Complete Blood Count (CBC): The presence of infection may be detected by the number of white blood cells or WBC present in the blood.
Difficulty breathing, especially during physical exertion or while lying down, can be a sign of myocardial infarction. This occurs due to the heart's inability to pump blood effectively, causing fluid buildup in the lungs.
Management options include medications, pelvic floor therapy, catheters, or surgical procedures.
Prevention
Symptoms and Causes
Hepatitis C. This virus often spreads when people who have it share needles and syringes. This virus is more likely to become chronic.
Blurred vision.
Pneumonia is commonly caused by viruses and bacteria such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae. Walking pneumonia, on the other hand, is most usually caused by the bacteria Mycoplasma pneumoniae.
The major advantage is that deep-brain stimulation is reversible, while intentional scarring damage is not. This treatment approach is almost always an option in later stages of Parkinson’s disease when levodopa therapy becomes less effective, and in people who have tremor that doesn’t seem to respond to the usual medications.
Flu season — when cases of the flu go up dramatically — in the Northern Hemisphere (which includes the U.S.) is October through May. The highest number of cases (peak) usually happen between December and February.
Regular use of tobacco products.
Multigated Acquisition Scan (MUGA scan).
Kidney damage.
Most lab tests exclude other conditions that may be causing your symptoms, like an infection, food intolerance or a different digestive condition, like inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Not everyone needs the same tests.
Early and accurate diagnosis of prostate cancer significantly improves treatment outcomes. Since prostate cancer often develops slowly and may not show symptoms in its early stages, screening plays a vital role, particularly in men over 50 or those at higher risk.
Choice of an anti-seizure medication depends on:
Rehabilitation after stroke
Spicy foods.
Stage 1: Early (Days 1 to 3)
Individuals with a family history of colorectal cancer or certain genetic conditions may benefit from genetic counselling and genetic testing to assess their risk and determine appropriate screening measures.
Fever.
being very thirsty
Colonoscopy: Can help your provider determine if you have certain bowel disorders that may be causing your symptoms, including polyps, IBD and cancerous growths. For this procedure, a provider inserts a scope that allows them to view your entire colon.
Stress.
Urine tests
Today, the Movement Disorder Society-Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) is healthcare providers’ main tool to classify this disease. The MDS-UPDRS examines four different areas of how Parkinson’s disease affects you:
Treatment
There are several treatments available for COPD.
surgery to remove the breast tumour;
Safe substance use. Only use drugs as directed. If you feel like your medications aren’t doing enough as directed, or you’re self-medicating with substances, see a healthcare provider for a better long-term treatment plan. If you have a substance use disorder, treatment can help.
Laparoscopy: In some cases, a laparoscopy (a minimally invasive surgery) is performed to examine the abdomen more closely and take biopsy samples from areas that may not be easily accessed through an endoscopy. This method is particularly useful for detecting metastasis.
Viral infections cause viral gastroenteritis, which is the most common type overall. Viruses cause 60% of all gastroenteritis cases. Norovirus alone accounts for 50% of all viral gastroenteritis cases.
Falls, bone fractures and other traumatic injuries
Gastroenteritis symptoms may include:
freckles
Stool-based tests are convenient, non-invasive, and can be effective in detecting colorectal cancer at early stages or identifying precancerous polyps.
a. Surgery – Radical Prostatectomy
Your provider can recommend alternative treatment options like an acetaminophen pain reliever for migraines.
Ventricular assist devices.
Talk to a healthcare provider if you’re worried you or a loved one have Alzheimer’s disease symptoms.
Healthcare providers classify epilepsies by their seizure type. Seizure categories are based on where they start in your brain, your level of awareness during a seizure and by presence or absence of muscle movements.
In 2021, higher-than-optimal BMI caused an estimated 3.7 million deaths from noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) such as cardiovascular diseases, diabetes,
Change in breathing.
Chronic viral hepatitis stages
The risk of developing Parkinson’s disease naturally increases with age, and the average age at which it starts is 60 years old. It’s slightly more common in males.
Blood in the urine
Spatial understanding
Modifiable risk factors are:
Chills.
Symptoms and Causes
Palliative treatments may include:
Hepatitis (A, B, C)
Retinal migraine (ocular migraine).
WHO defines overweight and obesity as outlined below.
If you get UTIs often, a healthcare provider may give you low-dose antibiotics for a short time to prevent the infection from coming back. The provider may recommend this cautious approach to treat frequent UTIs because your body can develop resistance to the antibiotic, and you can get other types of infections, including C. diff colitis. This practice isn’t very common.
More than 60% of prostate cancer cases occur in men aged 65 and older.
Genetic Testing: In cases where stomach cancer may have a genetic link (such as hereditary diffuse gastric cancer), genetic testing may be done to look for inherited mutations that increase the risk of developing the disease.
People with Stage C heart failure have a congestive heart failure diagnosis and currently have or previously had signs and symptoms of the condition.
Gastrointestinal bleeding: Ongoing blood loss from an ulcer
MDR-TB is a form of TB caused by bacteria that do not respond to rifampicin and isoniazid, the two most effective first-line TB drugs. MDR-TB is treatable and curable by using other drugs, which tend to be more expensive and with more side effects. People exposed to MDR-TB may receive TB preventive treatment with levofloxacin.
5. Obesity
Applying pressure to your temples in a circular motion.
medications to kill cancer cells and prevent spread, including hormonal therapies, chemotherapy or targeted biological therapies.
Complications
What are the complications of diabetes?
Book an appointment with Oncologist
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
Medications that treat Parkinson’s disease do so in multiple ways. Because of that, drugs that do one or more of the following are most likely:
chest pain
Frequent skin and/or vaginal yeast infections.
How is the common cold diagnosed?
The complications and side effects that happen with Parkinson’s disease treatments depend on the treatments themselves, the severity of the condition, any other health issues you have, and more. Your healthcare provider is the best person to tell you more about the likely side effects and complications that you might experience. They can also tell you what you can do to minimize how those side effects or complications affect your life.
Get screened for TB if you are at increased risk, such as if you have HIV or are in contact with people who have TB in your household or workplace.
Steam: If you don’t have a humidifier, take your baby into a steamy room such as a bathroom. Turn on the hot water, close the door and sit together in the steamy room for about 15 minutes. Don’t leave your baby alone in the room. Be safe around water. Giving your baby a warm bath may also work.
Muscle stiffness.
Medications – To block testosterone production or action
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)
Illness, fever.
early life events such as poor growth in utero, prematurity, and frequent or severe respiratory infections in childhood that prevent maximum lung growth;
What causes acid reflux?
What causes congestive heart failure?
What are the different types of skin cancer?
What is a urinary tract infection (UTI)?
Trouble swallowing
It’s OK to eat a very limited diet for a few days until the inflammation goes down. Just focus on bland foods that are easy to digest and avoid foods that might make your gastrointestinal symptoms worse.
Chronic stress, anxiety, and depression can increase the risk of heart attack by raising blood pressure, heart rate, and causing inflammation in the arteries.
Wash your hands after touching someone who has a cold.
Too much glucose circulating in your bloodstream causes diabetes, regardless of the type. However, the reason why your blood glucose levels are high differs depending on the type of diabetes.
These medications block an enzyme that can speed up how quickly Alzheimer’s damages your brain. They can improve some memory problems and reduce your risk of behavior changes. Your provider might prescribe:
Living With
The dengue virus is transmitted to humans through the bites of infected female mosquitoes, primarily the Aedes aegypti mosquito. Other species within the Aedes genus can also act as vectors, but their contribution is normally secondary to Aedes aegypti.
Wash your hands often with soap and water. If you can’t use soap and water, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer.
Within one to three days of picking up a cold virus, you may notice a tickle in your throat. About half of all people with colds report a tickly or sore throat as their first symptom. Other common cold symptoms you may experience during this early stage include:
Prodromal. You have general symptoms like fatigue, loss of appetite, or nausea and vomiting. This stage or phase typically lasts three to 10 days.
Difficulty in breathing
Kidneys (pyelonephritis).